SOURCE: Source Documentation\White Papers\CBS_Data_center_white_paper_DISTRICT HEATING.pdf


--- page 1 ---
Connecting data 
centers and district 
heating networks
From waste heat to useable heat
Grundfos commersial bulding services: Case
Introduction
Distributing, organising, and financing the reuse of waste heat 
from data centers in heat networks will become more accessible 
thanks to some convergent trends in both sectors, as they aim 
to achieve higher sustainability and decarbonization levels. The 
whitepaper was created in collaboration with Siemens.


--- page 2 ---
Introduction
This document outlines the challenges and benefits of 
upgrading waste heat from data centers to useable heat 
distributed by district heating networks.
Both data center and district heating sectors are expected to 
grow significantly in the next two decades, and both are under 
pressure to reduce their carbon footprint and improve their 
sustainability. The whitepaper provides high-level figures on 
the size of both sectors, the district heating market penetration 
in Europe and the typical fuel types used in the district 
heating market, highlighting the dominance of fossil fuels 
in this market.
The policy landscape for reusing waste heat is becoming more 
favourable, supported by the European institutions such as 
EuroHeat & Power (heat networks association) and the Climate 
Neutral Data Center Pact.
The second part of the whitepaper presents a technical 
examination of the quantities of waste heat available from 
data centers, their suitability for use in heat networks, and how 
the supply can fit the demand curves.
Another topic discussed is the range of temperatures in the 
heat networks, how they impact efficiency and network 
topologies, and how local needs can be optimised by the 
integration of heating plants.
The distance between data centers and the heat network 
affects the feasibility of the heat reuse project. While the 
impact of distance on the operations and overall efficiency is 
limited and can be minimised by good-practise and design, 
multi-kilometre connections can have a significant impact on 
the total investment cost.
Because of their expertise, understanding of regulations and 
standards, and efficiencies of scale, heat network operators are 
the preferred project leaders but ESCO’s come a close second 
and may have an advantage in terms of agility and ability to 
raise the finance necessary.
The normal model involves the data center delivering waste 
heat to a heating plant, owned and operated by a heat supplier 
who works closely with a heat network operator, but the 
model may vary depending on the location, stakeholders, and 
their motivation.
To test the viability of heat reuse from a data center, a business 
case was considered based on a 10 MW IT load. Three heat reuse 
connection types (classic, COP efficient, and boosted) were 
defined to examine the projects viability in terms of efficiency, 
useable heat price, and heat network temperatures.
As a discussion point each connection type was compared with 
a stand-alone heat pump and the results were as follows. The 
“classic” connection type provided savings of approximately 
€0.5M effectively reducing the marginal heat generation costs 
from €30/MWh to €23/MWh. 
However, the most efficient solutions may not always be 
the most beneficial in terms of economic outcomes. In the 
models examined the, the net cash flow for the least efficient 
connection type (“booster”) is greatest, with the simple payback 
period of approximately 9 years.
The paper confirms that there is benefit to both industries by 
linking data centres to heat networks. To increase the viability 
of these projects we encourage data centers to engage early, 
share information and actively collaborate with local authorities 
and heat network operators to influence the planning and 
development of sustainable infrastructure.
2


--- page 3 ---
Table of contents
Executive Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 2 
Sector Coupling Overview. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 4
Data centers Energy Consumption. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 4
Heat Networks Overview. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 5
Heat Networks Trends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 6
Support for Heat Reuse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 7 
Technical Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 9
Heat Network Temperatures and
Connection options. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	10
Heat Network Demand Profiles and
Exisitng Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 12
Distance from the Heat Network. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 13
Commercial Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	14
Project Stakeholders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	14
Operational Organisation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 15
Initial Assessment of Potential Projects. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	16
Use Case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 17
Baseline Assumptions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 17
Defining the Scenarios. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	18
Results and Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	19
Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	20
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	23
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	23
3


--- page 4 ---
Sector Coupling Overview 
Working towards net-zero and improved energy efficiency, the 
two energy-intensive sectors, Data centers and district heating 
are expected to grow significantly in the coming years. Coupling 
data centers with heat networks may reduce society’s carbon 
footprint significantly. Reusing heat from all European “data 
centers” could save more than 10 million tons of CO2 annually.
The data center sector is evolving rapidly, with flexibility and 
agility being its main characteristics, and short technological 
cycles forcing decisions with short payback times. District 
heating networks operate in highly regulated environments, 
with long-term planning and low, but certain rates of return on 
investments. Both sectors face sustainability pressures: data 
centers being scrutinised for their large electricity consumption 
and the associated waste heat generation, and heat networks 
for using fossil fuels. However, the environmental impact of 
both sectors can be significantly lowered if the waste heat from 
data centers was reused in district heating networks, effectively 
helping to decarbonise the heat networks.
Data centers energy consumption
Data centers are the backbone of the internet and data 
processing. Recent regulations requiring local data storage and 
processing are driving a shift from the historic data center hubs 
such as Frankfurt, London, Amsterdam, and Paris (FLAP), to a 
more proportional geographical distribution of the market.
Data center energy efficiency keeps improving with the average 
PUE for global data centers falling from 2.0 to below 1.6 in the 
years 2010-20201, with hyper-scale data centers achieving 
values of around 1.2. However, the overall EU data center energy 
consumption almost doubled between 2010 and 2020, from 54 
to 104 TWh/a, due to the increase in data processing, and this is 
expected to grow to 160 TWh/a by 20302 even with the above 
improvement in energy efficiency.3
4


--- page 5 ---
Figure 1 Heat delivered via DHN markets
Heat networks overview 
District heating networks provide multiple users with heat for 
space heating and domestic hot water. Each network has a 
pipeline with a higher temperature feed or flow pipeline, and a 
lower temperature return pipeline, with water returned to the 
heating plant for re-heating.
 Moving the heat generation process from individual buildings 
to centralised heating plants allows for efficiencies of scale 
in terms of energy consumption, pollution control, and peak 
shaving. On the downside, heat distribution is associated 
with heat losses, requires additional capital investment and 
ongoing maintenance.
Europe is one of the largest district heating markets with 3,176 
PJ (1,045 TWh) of heat delivered annually, following China and 
Russia which account for more than 70% of the global footprint 
(see Figure 1). The US is a relatively small market with 458 
PJ (127 TWh). 
Within Europe, the highest share of heating provided by heat 
networks is Iceland (92% of total heat demand). Very high 
shares, above 50%, can be found in the Nordics (excluding 
Norway), the Baltic countries and Poland, while Greece and 
Portugal have shares of less than 1% as per Figure 2.
China,  
5894 PJ
Russia,  
5300 PJ
Europe,  
3176 PJ
Rest of  
the 
World 
750 PJ
USA,  
458 PJ
South Korea  
256 PJ
5


--- page 6 ---
Figure 2 Share of DHNs in total heating demand
Heat network trends 
Climate change and decarbonisation were not top of the 
agenda for the promoters of traditional heat networks, and 
most existing networks are fuelled by fossil fuels, making up 
76% of the EU’s primary energy in heat networks. Biomass, 
domestic and industrial waste are growing sources of fuel, with 
shares of 19% and 5% respectively4. Many networks integrate 
combined heat and power generation to increase efficiency and 
improve air quality.
The investment in the district heating networks is expected to 
grow significantly for various reasons. 
The increase in heat demand, the need to retrofit aging 
assets, the introduction of energy efficiency initiatives, and 
the drive towards decarbonisation, all contribute to this 
investment demand.  
According to Heat Roadmap Europe3, district heating capacity is 
expected to double by 2050, adding 160 TWh/a of capacity per 
decade. The growth in DHN’s capacity is in line with the forecast 
growth in energy consumption by the EU’s data centers over 
this period. The growth in both sectors presents  
significant opportunities for the DHN’s to absorb the growth in 
waste heat generated by the data center industry across the EU.
92%
DHN Share
0%
1%
50%
53%
12%
7%
1%
23%
2%
Heat networks can vary in scale. Some of these DHNs cover 
entire urban areas, with hundreds of kilometres of pipelines. 
Three of the largest systems are in Warsaw, Copenhagen and 
Stockholm with total lengths close to 1,500 km, delivering 
gigawatts of heat.
Other schemes cover smaller districts, amounting to tens of 
kilometres in length, from which the English term “District 
heating” was derived, to local heat networks in villages, on 
campuses (universities and airports) that can be just a few 
kilometres long, and have total installed capacities below 
ten megawatts.
6


--- page 7 ---
Figure 3 - Fuel mixes for DHNs in EEA countries  
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Austria
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czechia
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Hungary
Iceland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Fossil fuels
Biomass/RES waste
Other RES
Figure 4 - Heat networks fuel mix combined across EEA
0%
100%
19%
5%
76%
Heat networks decarbonisation is a complex task, and progress 
has been slow due to uncertainty around CO2 emission costs 
and fuel prices. Meanwhile operator’s investment budgets 
have been stretched by projects aimed at meeting pollutant 
emission limits.
Renewable heat generation and efficiency targets combined 
with fuel and electricity price trends are important drivers for 
heat networks decarbonisation. However, until recently, they 
were insufficient to promote substantial change in the industry.
Fossil fuels are the predominant energy source for district 
heating schemes, accounting for three quarters of the total 
supply, with biomass and renewable waste accounting for 20%, 
and other renewables and electricity making up the remaining 
5%4, illustrated in Figures 3 and Figure 4.
With the increasing integration of renewable energy sources 
and the increased focus on sustainability and waste reduction 
policies, it is plausible that 80-90% of the existing heat plants 
and networks will require a deep retrofit.
7


--- page 8 ---
Heat Network Operators need to keep the cost of heat supply 
low and avail of the Emissions Trading Schemes, to enable 
them to compete with individual heating systems that are 
exempt from emissions trading. The improved energy efficiency 
of buildings connected to heat networks reduces the revenue 
from existing connections, often affecting the network’s 
ability to raise the investment capital needed to expand and 
decarbonize heat generation networks. However, the building 
efficiency increase can also provide efficiency gains, where 
supply and return temperatures can be lowered, thereby 
resulting in reduced heat losses, that allows the HNO to expand 
the heat network without additional production capacity. As 
such, modern technological solutions where temperatures 
are managed to meet the exact consumer demands, in a de-
centralized way, could open more possibilities for renewable 
production or the use of waste heat.
These trends can be offset by the availability of preferential 
finance from research or environmental agencies, but for most 
heat networks, systemic changes will be needed to enable the 
growth and decarbonisation require by the EU. One such policy, 
the “Fit for 55” package will create a mechanism compelling the 
building sector to pay for CO2 emissions, levelling the playing 
field for heat networks.
The objectives of this package is to combine waste heat reuse 
together with renewable energy, setting a target 2.1 % annual 
increase for renewable and waste-heat energy sources4, 
resulting in electric heat pumps delivering most of the heat in 
the EU by 2050.
Funding and support will continue to be linked with the 
“efficient district heating and cooling system”, yet to be 
defined and replace co-generation with higher renewable and 
waste heat usage5. Heat reuse from data centers is specifically 
mentioned and will receive support in upcoming regulations.
Similarly, the EU’s Green Finance Taxonomy lists all the related 
topics as sustainable, including the production of usable heat 
using waste heat, district heating distribution, installation, and 
the operation of electric heat pumps.
Support for heat reuse 
Associations and bodies from both sectors voiced their 
support of heat reuse from data centers in support of the 
decarbonisation agenda. EuroHeat & power, a European 
network of district heating organisations, that includes Siemens 
and Grundfos amongst its members, published a policy 
paper in May 2021 calling on the EU to recognise data center 
heat recovery in EU frameworks, to boost skills training, and 
integrate heat reuse in guidelines for the data center industry6.
Some of the recommendations are already materialising in 
the “Fit for 55” package and the 2021 Best Practice Guidelines7 
published by the European Communities “JRC” and the “EU 
Green Public Procurement Criteria” guidelines1. The Climate 
Neutral Data Centre Pact is a pledge from 22 national trade 
associations and 60 individual members, to achieve climate 
neutrality in European data centers by 2030. One of its areas of 
fucus is to promote regulations on data centre sustainability. 
The pact pledges to explore the possibilities of exporting 
data centre waste heat for reuse in heat networks and calls 
policymakers to:
Recognise recovered and 
reused heat as an energy 
source that reduces 
emissions for real-estate 
developers, building 
owners and other 
stakeholders.
Enact a policy framework 
that facilitates and 
encourages any energy-
intensive industry to 
pursue heat recovery and 
reuse projects, in 
partnership with 
communities or 
businesses8.
1
2
8


--- page 9 ---
Heat pump limitations 
Heat pumps use refrigerants in a refrigeration cycle, where 
electric power is used to compress the gas and elevate the 
refrigerant fluid’s temperature. The principle is similar to 
CRAC’s and chillers widely used in data center cooling.
There are thermodynamic limits to the heat pumps efficiency, 
associated with the temperature difference between the 
evaporator (the cooling part) and the condenser (the heating 
part). The bigger this delta T, the more electricity required 
relative to the amount of heat generated. The efficiency of the 
heat pumps is called Coefficient of Performance (COP) - useful 
heat delivered divided by the power consumed.
COP values depend upon the temperature difference between 
the heat source and heat sink. The heat source in this case 
being the data center, where higher temperatures are 
preferred, and the latter is the heat network where lower 
temperatures are preferred.
In most cases of heat reuse, COP of the heat pump falls within 
the range of 3.0 to 6.0. That means that from each kWh of 
electric power used for heat upgrade, three to six kWhs of 
useful heat is generated by the heat pump.
Technical Considerations  
Most of the power consumed by the IT equipment in data 
centers is converted into heat, and that heat needs to be 
removed to enable the equipment to function properly.
A variety of cooling technologies are used to keep the electronic 
components in the data center operating within acceptable 
temperature and humidity ranges. Regardless of the type of 
cooling systems, direct expansion CRAC units, chilled water fed 
CRAH units, or evaporative cooling, significant amounts of low-
grade waste heat needs to be dissipated.
Most of the waste heat is in the 20-26°C temperature range9. 
Waste heat in this temperature range has a limited number 
of applications, such as heating of swimming pools or 
aquaculture farms.
These applications are relatively sparse and have a low total 
heat demand compared to the amount of heat generated in 
a modern data center. For most data centers the opportunity 
to export their waste heat is limited due to the higher 
temperature requirements of the potential users, resulting in 
the need to upgrade this heat using heat pumps.
Five key technical factors to be considered for the 
heat reuse are:
Heat pump Technology Limitations
Heat Network Temperatures
Connection Options
Heat Network Demand Profiles and Existing Assets
Distance from the Heat Network
9


--- page 10 ---
Heat network temperatures 
The maximum, the average and the return temperatures 
in a heat network affect the efficiency of the heat upgrade 
when using heat pumps. The operating temperatures of heat 
networks vary considerably depending on the networks age, 
client’s needs, and the technologies used. 
The evolution of heat networks has resulted in the continuous 
reduction of the networks operation temperatures. First 
generation (1G) networks operated approximately 200°C, 
second generation (2G) which are predominant in Central 
Europe operate at 100-120 °C, whilst the third-generation 
networks favoured in Nordic countries operate at 80-100°C.
The modern (4G) networks have been specifically developed to 
make use of renewable low-grade heat sources, such as solar 
and geothermal, operating with flow temperatures well below 
70°C, and these networks are suitable to utilise waste heat from 
data centers.
The latest (5G) networks are an emerging concept where water 
at 10-25°C is used as the base load for efficient heat pump 
operation, without the need for ground source heat pumps 
and geothermal wells, but are out of scope for this document. 
Larger existing grids can be divided into temperature zones 
with different heat demands. When designing or renovating 
grids, the zones should be optimized to deliver the temperature 
required at the point of use, thus resulting in reduced heat 
losses and the ability to utilise locally generated waste heat.
Heat Network 
Generation
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
Flow temperature 
120-200°C
100-120°C
80-100°C
(50) 60-80°C
10-25°C
Return temperature
100-140°C
80-110°C
60-90°C
40-70°C
3-15°C
Typical heat sources
Steam boilers
CHPs, boilers
CHPs, boilers, 
geothermal
Heat pumps, 
geothermal, solar
Waste heat, 
goethermal, solar
Table 1 Typical temperatures for generations of heat networks
10


--- page 11 ---
Network connection options 
Depending on the topology of the heat network, its operator might have preferences regarding the way the heat is supplied:
Figure 5 Options for connecting heat upgrading plant to the 
heat network
Classic: Return to feed 
a) The waste heat reuse plant is expected to be the main source 
of heat for the scheme. It needs to operate in the “classic” 
paradigm of heating up the water from the return to the 
flow pipeline,
COP efficient: Return to return 
b) When connecting to larger systems, HN operators may 
choose to maximise the efficiency of heat recovery and accept 
the lower-grade heat into the return pipework
Booster: Feed to feed 
c) Boosting the temperature locally, at the far edge of the 
network, might allow for lowering temperatures in the 
remaining parts of the network leading to overall system 
efficiency improvement.
As the temperatures in networks often change seasonally, it is possible to deliver the “classic” mode in the summer and switch to “COP 
efficient” mode in the winter, when flow temperatures increase. Each network may have slightly different expectations and boundary 
conditions, which can be reflected in the heat prices. Heat supplied to the DHN is often bought using dynamic tariffs depending on 
outdoor temperatures and connection parameters.
(a) Classic: Return to feed
(b) COP efficient: Return to return
(c) Booster: Feed to feed
ΔT: 60 TO 80°C
ΔT: 60 TO 65°C
ΔT: 77 TO 82°C
HPs
HPs
HPs
11


--- page 12 ---
Heat network demand profiles 
Heat networks provide heating for multiple purposes: space 
heating; sanitary hot water; and, sometimes, process heat for 
industry. Besides the efficiency of the system, the other critical 
factor for heat reuse, is the ability of the network to absorb the 
usable heat and utilise it. Large data centers generate more 
heat than many district heating networks could distribute.
Heat networks are usually fed from multiple sources, such as 
CHP plants, boilers, and heat pumps, with the base load 
provided by the most efficient source throughout the year, and 
the least efficient source topping up when heat demand is at its 
peak. Ideally the base load source should operate for as long as 
possible providing a steady supply, and in the case of a data 
centre which operates constantly, it can meet the summer base 
load for sanitary hot water with the network drawing in other 
sources as the demand for heating increases.
When examining heat demand profiles per million inhabitants, 
the difference in demand is greater in colder climates than in 
warmer climates. For example, in Helsinki the summer demand 
is only 5% of the winter demand, compared to milder regions 
such as London or Madrid where the summer demand is 20% of 
the winter demand as seen in Figure 6.  Using examples from 
Denmark where domestic hot water production by the DH is 
more cost efficient than production by electricity, the summer 
demand may be as high as 30% of the winter demand.
Accurate data on heat demand in networks is difficult to obtain, 
but research shows that typical heat networks have 30-60% 
more capacity than their peak demand, to cover for safety of 
supply and redundancy, and the demand profile follows the 
local climate conditions.
Figure 6 Heat demand profiles for chosen European cities10
Figure 7 Exemplar load duration curve of a heat network
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
-
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Madrid
London
Berlin
Brussels
Stockholm
Helsinki
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
1
51
101
151
201
251
GWh/month/1M
351
301
12


--- page 13 ---
Distance from the Heat Network 
Distance can have a big impact on the investment costs. The 
ratio of the connection costs can increase from 3 to 50% of the 
total CAPEX when the distance increases from 50 to 4,000 m.
It is important to flag that while civil works, including 
excavation and pipelines constitute more than half of the 
typical pipeline costs, other factors such as securing pipeline 
routes, road closures and locating auxiliary equipment could be 
challenging, especially in densely populated areas with multiple 
stakeholders, such as landowners, infrastructure operators and 
local authorities. Conversely, densely populated areas are 
beneficial for heat networks since a significant amount of 
energy is distributed in a small geographical area, thereby 
resulting in a low operating cost.
The distance between the data center and the heat network 
also impacts pump selections, running costs, energy 
consumption, heat losses and maintenance. Apart from the 
capital cost of the pipeline these other costs are acceptable.
A well-insulated, correctly sized pipeline in a 70-80°C system 
will have moderate friction losses, and the heat loss will be 0.5-
1.5% per kilometre 11. The heat losses can be further reduced by 
recirculating the waste heat and upgrading the heat closer to 
the DHN. This can reduce the heat losses by a factor of 3 or 4 
(Figure 8 Option B). In addition, this configuration allows for the 
use of cheaper Polyethylene (PE) pipes due to the lower 
operating temperatures. As such, the distance between the 
waste heat source and the point of use should be evaluated for 
the optimal placement for the heat upgrade asset. Two options 
can be considered for connecting data centers to district heat 
networks, as illustrated in Figure 8: 
Figure 8 Connector options: on-site and at the substation
Option A: heat upgrade at the data center site
Option B: heat upgrade at the heat network substation site
Integrated  
chiller-heat- 
pumps
Integrated 
chiller-heat- 
pumps
DHN
DHN
Where the distance between the DC & DCN relatively short.  
Where the distance between the DC & DCN  is greater. 
13


--- page 14 ---
Commercial Considerations
Project Stakeholders 
A heat reuse project is a complex undertaking. As access to heat 
is considered a basic necessity, the market is regulated with 
arduous reporting and monitoring requirements, operated on 
thin margins, and reliant on subsidies.
Data center operators are not accustomed to providing long-
term services to the local, often tightly regulated DHN market, 
and expanding their business in this direction may require a 
significant change in their mindset.
However, the heat network operators have the technical 
expertise, a commercial incentive, and the infrastructure to help 
achieve targets for renewable waste heat.
There is an active and growing market of third-party specialists 
providing energy-related services known as Energy Service 
Companies (ESCOs), Energy Performance Companies (EPCs) and 
Energy as a Service (EaaS) providers. 
They offer expertise, funding and/or operation of energy-
related assets.
Other stakeholders include regulatory bodies, financial 
institutions, environmental funds, infrastructure funds, green 
transition and research agencies, local communities and 
alternative heating or cooling consumers.
Local authorities have a growing interest in promoting heat 
reuse in their communities. The variety of stakeholders adds to 
the complexity of the projects, with each stakeholder having a 
potential impact on the project’s feasibility.
Heat reuse project 
Other stakeholders
3rd party
Operators
Heat network 
operators 
Energy Service 
Companies  
(ESCO's)
Energy as a  
Service provider (Eaas)
Regulatory 
bodies
Banks
Financial  
Institutions
Local  
neighbourhood
Infrastructure
Alternative heating 
& cooling  
off takers
Green transition 
and research  
agencies
Local authorities
14


--- page 15 ---
Operational Organisation  
The normal and most commercially viable model is where the 
local heat network operator sets up the heat upgrade plant12, 
providing cooling to the Data Center and heating to the district 
network.
However, for a greenfield project it might be more practical for 
the data centre development team to coordinate the 
modification of the heat upgrading plant and the connection 
points in conjunction with their planning and land acquisition. 
The alternative is for the DHN operator to manage the upgrade 
and connection as a separate project. Both approaches merit 
consideration.
Stable waste heat streams are valuable to DHN’s, provided they 
facilitate the generating high-grade heat at a lower cost than 
the alternatives. Data center operators also benefit from 
exporting their waste heat to the DHN’s and save on the 
running cost of their traditional cooling plant.
Heat has most value when the outside temperature is low, but 
this is when many data centers avail of free cooling, creating a 
conflict in the supply and demand for waste heat reuse.
To overcome this conflict, it makes sense to encourage data 
centers to exchange their waste heat for cooling services free of 
charge instead of utilising free cooling. This is how Meta 
manage their cooling in Odense13.
A new heating plant based on heat pump technology is a multi-
million-euro investment.
Many heat networks operators may have trouble funding such 
investments as their budgets may be committed to other 
business-critical investments.
This provides an opportunity for third party ESCO’s to invest in 
heat reuse projects, increasing the prospect of these projects 
happening. 
Co-funding between the data center and heat network operator 
is another option, for example the Open District heating project 
in Stockholm, 201414 where a data center operator co-funded a 
significant share of the heat upgrade plant.
With ambitious targets for 2030 approaching (like the European 
“Fit for 55” package), funding for decarbonisation projects 
should become more accessible, but securing public funding is 
often an arduous, time-consuming processes.
15


--- page 16 ---
Assessment of Potential Projects 
A heat reuse scheme is a significant undertaking with many 
variables affecting the project’s success. For the initial 
assessment of a location, a conditions assessment chart shown 
as Figure 9 can be used. The parameters to be looked at while 
undertaking the initial assessments are: 
	•
The overall energy transition investment climate, regulatory 
challenges and incentives landscape
	•
The heat network parameters such as operating 
temperatures (seasonality), distance between data center 
and heat network substation, existing heat supplys 
and the size of the heat network relative to the size of 
the data center.
	•
The type and size of the data center. These are not critical 
for the projects feasibility, but they still affect the costs and 
efficiency, with larger data centers designs using chilled 
water being the easiest to connect to heat networks.
An overview of parameters to be considered in the initial 
assessment is presented graphically in Figure 9, indicating 
which conditions are favourable for sector coupling, and to 
enable prioritisation of projects. The parameters have been 
categorised as “great”, “good”, “fair” and “poor”. The more 
parameters that fall into the “great” category the more suitable 
the project is for connection to the District Heating Network.
Figure 9 Overview of assessment criteria and scores
Data Center
Heat Network
Region
Regulatory 
Environment
Temperature
Distance
Generation 
assets
Demand size 
and profile
Size (power  
capacity)
Cooling type
Targets 
Transforma-
tion 
incentives
<70°C
<100m
Fossil-based  
& heat only
>20x DC 
capacity
>5 MWe
Chilled water
70-90°C
100-200m
Fossil-based 
CHP or mixed
10-20x DC 
capacity
0.5-5 MWe
DX systems
Only long-term 
targets, no  
existing 
incentives
>90°C
Great
Good
Fair
Poor
>2km
Mostly 
renewables
<10x DC 
capacity
<0.5 MWe
Evaporative /  
air free-cooling
16


--- page 17 ---
Use Case - 10MW Data Center  
Baseline Assumptions  
Large data centers continuously generate waste heat, 
amounting to tens of GWh of heat per annum. Benefits from 
the efficiencies of scale are important for infrastructural 
investments but finding sufficient demand for heat during 
summertime can be challenging.
The analysis focuses on a 10 MW data center and a mid-size 
heat network supplying 10,000-20,000 connected households, 
with an installed heat capacity of 100-200 MW. The ratio of the 
data centers waste heat and the heat networks requirements is 
(1:10) allowing 100% of waste heat reuse in the network.
The investment required for 10 MW heat pump installation will 
depend on several factors, such as a greenfield or brownfield 
site, available infrastructure, power grid connection and lengths 
of pipework. In most European cases, CAPEX is estimated to be 
somewhere between five and ten million euros.
Some of this investment may be offset when public funding, 
subsidies and preferential loans are accounted for. It is 
estimated that up to 70% of the investment may attract such 
funding. Data center operators can also benefit from savings on 
their cooling infrastructure, which needs to adhere to their tier 
level and redundancy requirements.
17


--- page 18 ---
Baseline Assumptions  
To illustrate the impact of the factors discussed earlier, three 
integrated cooling and heating options have been examined 
with cooling and heating provided separately. The three modes 
are shown in Figure 5:
	•
Classic – heating the return water to the feed parameters
	•
COP efficient – heating the return water by 5°C
	•
Booster – heating the water slightly below the feed 
parameters by 5°C
Each model assumes that the low-grade heat is provided free of 
charge to the project, and the high-grade heat is sold for the 
price linked to the utility of the heat to the system: 
	•
lowest for pre-heating the return; 
	•
mid-level for the classic return to feed upgrade; 
	•
highest for high-temperature boosting; 
The sale may be an external transaction if the project is 
operated by a third-party, or an internal interdepartmental 
transaction if it is operated by the DHN operator. In practice 
heat prices are dynamic and depend on the connection type, 
outside weather conditions and other factors. For simplicity, the 
business cases shown here use averaged values.  
Based on the assumed COP, and electricity costs of 0.1 €/kWh15, 
the cost of heat generation is calculated. The resulting cash 
flows and the marginal cost of heat generation are used to 
compare the three models.
Each model uses similar equipment with a cooling capacity of 
10 MW and examines the three different connection options 
presented in Figure 5, which impacts their efficiency (COP). 
These options are compared to a standalone heat pump 
solution using surface water from a river or a lake as its heat 
source. The calculations are based on a full year (8760 hours) 
with the same average load.
18


--- page 19 ---
Results and discussions  
The lowest marginal cost of heat generation, €19/MWh as 
presented in Table 2, results from the “COP efficient” model and 
is competitive with natural gas-based heat generation. The 
“classic” and “booster” models result in heat generation costs of 
€23 and €30/MWh respectively. 
This compares with a heat generation cost of €39/MWh using 
natural gas, with the gas costing €25/MWh, and a carbon cost 
of €60/tCO2. This utilisation of waste heat saves 20-33% of the 
cost of heat generation compared to using good quality 
ambient heat, such as surface water.
In the business case the difference in cash flow between the 
“classic” model and a standalone heat pumps results in 
approximately €0.5M savings per year.
This amounts to 20% of the electrical cost of running the stand-
alone heat pump, effectively reducing the heat generation costs 
from €30/MWh to €23/MWh. Surprisingly, results show that 
the most efficient solutions may not be the most beneficial in 
terms of economic outcomes.
When comparing the various models, the net cash flow for the 
least efficient, booster, model is higher than that of the 
“efficient” model, due to larger amounts and higher value of 
heat, indicating projects should be looked at from multiple 
perspectives. This shows the sensitivity of financial results from 
heat sales prices and generation efficiency (COP)
Table 2 Business case scenarios assumptions and results 
*COP values for chillers only, rather than for the entire cooling systems
Combining cooling and heating
Reference
Classic
Efficient
Booster
Standalone 
heat pumps
Temperatures
Cooling Heating
(26-18°C)
(60-80°C)
(26-18°C)
(60-65°C)
(26-18°C)
(77-82°C)
 -
(60-80°C)
Heat Price
€/MWh
€35.0
€28.0
€40.0
€35.0
Electricity Price
€/MWh
€100
€100
€100
€100
Cooling Capacity
MW
10.0
10.0
10.0
-
COP*
-
4.5
5.5
3.5
3.5
Heating Capacity
MW
12.9
12.2
14.0
14.0
Power Rating
MW
2.9
2.2
4.0
4.0
Annual Heat  
Generation
MWh/a
73,209 
69,593 
79,716 
79,716 
Heat Revenue
€k/a
€k 2,562
€k 1,949
€k 3,189
€k 2,790
Electricity Costs
€k/a 
€k 1,709
€k 1,329
€k 2,393
€k 2,393
At a cost of €6m for the heat pump system, and the availability 
of an onsite DHN connection, a simple payback on the 
investment is approximately 9 years, without availing of 
any subsidies.
This is in line with acceptable investment criteria for these 
types of infrastructure projects. When we consider the potential 
subsidies for heat decarbonising projects, the commercial 
justification becomes more attractive.
The alternative, using ambient heat as a source for heat pumps 
of the same size, would result in a payback period of more 
than 30 years. 
The values presented are based on average European 
conditions. There are significant variations across the markets 
in energy, labour, and materials prices. Each project is different 
and needs to be engineered to meet local requirements, such as 
temperatures, heat demand management and the availability 
of complementary supplies etc.
19


--- page 20 ---
Conclusions  
The expertise, economies of scale and familiarity with 
regulations place heat network operators in the most 
favourable position to become the principal project developers 
for the generation of useable heat from data center waste 
heat. Experienced third-party ESCOs come a close second 
with the potential of being more agile and having stronger 
financial resources.
Data centre operators can promote new projects and offer 
long-term waste heat supplies to heat network operators, or 
other parties that may be interested in utilising waste heat, e.g., 
hospital or university campuses, agriculture or aquiculture, or 
other potential consumers who may be located a reasonable 
distance from the data centre.
Contractual terms are important to both the data center 
operator and the DHN. Recent examples show a positive trend 
where data centers and DHN’s have agreed ten year contracts, 
subject to certain exit clauses which deliver predictable 
economic and sustainable results for both parties
Data center operators can benefit from:
	•
Savings in operational costs of cooling systems. For the 
business case, a 10 MW data center, the savings can exceed 
€1M annually, depending on the geographical location.
	•
Further savings in the CAPEX and OPEX of their traditional 
cooling plants due to the heat network taking the base 
cooling load and reducing their need for heat rejection plant.
Heat networks operators can benefit from:
	•
Operational savings from the increased efficiency of heat 
pumps. For the business case, a 10 MW data center, the 
operational savings were approximately €0.5M per annum 
compared to standalone heat pumps using ambient heat.
	•
A stable waste heat source which can contribute to their 
renewable and waste heat reuse obligations.
Reusing heat from data centers is profitable even without 
subsidies and will always provide a better result than heat 
pumps using ambient heat. Planned data centers should be, 
and often are, designed with waste heat export capabilities to 
enable easy deployment of future connections.
Heat reuse projects can help decarbonise heat networks, but 
the DHN operators might not be unaware of the data center 
potential in their area and prioritise other projects. 
Therefore, for the projects to materialise, we encourage 
data centers operators to engage early, share information 
and actively collaborate with local authorities and heat 
network operators to influence planning and development of 
sustainable infrastructure.
20


--- page 21 ---
References 
1. JRC Development of the EU Green Public Procurement (GPP) Criteria for data centers, Server Rooms and Cloud Services [Link]
2. IEA District heating Portal [Link]
3. Series of studies into heating market across Europe [Link]
4. European Green Deal Draft Renewable Energy Directive [Link]
5. European Green Deal Draft Energy Efficiency Directive [Link]
6. Euroheat&Power 2021, Recommendation Paper: Boosting waste heat recovery to support decarbonization [Link]
7. JRC 2021, 2021 Best Practice Guidelines for the EU Code of Conduct on data center Energy Efficiency [Link]
8. Climate Neutral data center Pact, Policy Paper 2021, [Link]
9. Google data center Efficiency [Link]
10. Hot Maps Project - CM Heat Load Profile [Link]
11. District heating and Cooling Networks in the European Union [Link]
12. Celsius City – Waste Heat from data centers [Link]
13. Facebook Tech Case Study [Link]
14. Open District heating, [Link]
15. Marginal cost being the cost of generating an additional unit of heat above a baseline – it focuses on variable costs of operation.
CAPEX
Capital Expenditure 
CHP
Combined Heat and Power
COP
Coefficient of Performance 
CRAC
Computer Room Air Conditioning
CRAH
Computer Room Air Handling
DC
Data Center
DH
District Heating
DHN
District Heating Network
EaaS
Energy as a Service
EPCs
Energy Performance Contractors
ESCOs
Energy Service Companies
EU
European Union
JRC
Joint Research Center
OPEX
Operational Expenditure
PE
Polyethylene 
PUE
Power Usage Effectiveness
Table of abbreviations and acronyms
21


--- page 22 ---
GRUNDFOS Holding A/S
Poul Due Jensens Vej 7
DK-8850 Bjerringbro
Tel: +45 87 50 14 00
www.grundfos.com
© Grundfos Holding A/S 05.2023
0523/CBS/4013956-Brandbox
