SOURCE: Source Documentation\White Papers\Danfoss White Paper Sample.pdf


--- page 1 ---
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Roadmap for 
decarbonizing 
cities


--- page 2 ---
1  
 2 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
The battle 
against climate 
change will be 
won – or lost – 
in cities
Foreword by Mika Kulju
President, Danfoss Power Electronics & Drives
“Our world needs climate action 
on all fronts — everything, 
everywhere, all at once.” 
António Guterres, UN Secretary-General 
 2 
showcase green technology and create attractive 
places to live and work. In the coming chapters, 
we take a deep dive into the carbon footprints of 
all major aspects of our lives in cities: the heating 
and cooling of the buildings we live in, the 
construction sites that build our homes, roads, 
and workplaces, the transport that gets us to 
work, the infrastructure that supplies our goods 
and handles waste, and the data centers that 
constitute the digital backbone of the city. In the 
next few years, the battle against climate change 
will be won – or lost – in cities. The solutions are 
there, but political leaders need to take action in 
scaling them. Let’s get started.
Skyscrapers, traﬀic jams, shopping malls, 
and air conditioners. It is not hard to see why 
cities account for two-thirds of global energy 
consumption and more than 70% of annual 
global carbon emissions.1 With more than half of 
the world’s population living in cities today – a 
number expected to increase to almost 70% in 
20502 – we will not reach the goals of the Paris 
Agreement without a deep decarbonization        
of cities. 
Many cities all over the world have committed to 
ambitious climate targets and are taking steps 
to reduce their emissions. However, as the most 
recent IPCC report exposed, the 1.5°C target is 
moving out of reach, and it’s likely that the world 
will exceed 1.5°C of warming in the near term if 
we “keep walking instead of sprinting.”3 Climate 
change has already resulted in negative impacts 
on human well-being and key infrastructure in 
cities. For instance, heatwaves and air pollution 
have intensified in cities.4 To prevent the worst 
of the climate crisis, rapid, deep, and sustained 
change is necessary. Or as UN Secretary-
General António Guterres puts it: “Our world 
needs climate action on all fronts — everything, 
everywhere, all at once.”5 The ambition of this 
whitepaper is to demonstrate how “everything, 
everywhere, all at once” can be done in cities. 
Cities oﬀer some of the best possibilities to 
optimize urban planning and accelerate a green 
transition, and there are already accessible, 
cost-eﬀicient technologies out there capable 
of cutting emissions suﬀiciently to meet global 
climate goals.6 By oﬀering a roadmap for a green 
urban transition, it shows how cities can act as 
ambitious, inspirational front-runners that


--- page 3 ---
3  
 4 
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
With evidence from credible sources, Danfoss Impact is written to show how 
existing eﬀiciency technologies can lower the cost of decarbonization and 
accelerate the electrification of our economies. 
This special, longer issue of Danfoss Impact aims to provide a concrete 
roadmap for mayors, local decision-makers, and urban planners on how 
to eliminate all major drivers of the carbon footprint of cities. The paper 
explores how available technologies can improve the livelihoods of citizens 
while at the same time making our economies more resilient and creating 
jobs. It oﬀers a holistic and concrete view of the major opportunities for 
decarbonizing cities.
However, the solutions presented are not exhaustive and the paper will 
not explore the provision and build out of renewable sources of energy. 
Crucial as this is, it is a theme well-researched and analyzed. In addition, 
although they fall outside the scope of this paper, urban planning measures 
such as creating walkable cities, parks and open spaces, wetlands, and 
urban agriculture to reduce flood risk and heat-island eﬀects should also be 
implemented.7
In cities, the transport sector and the building sector are the largest 
contributors to carbon emissions, and therefore the paper focuses on all 
major levers for decarbonizing those two sectors – reducing energy waste 
through eﬀiciency measures, electrifying, and integrating sectors to reuse 
otherwise wasted energy.
The paper was prepared by Case and Analytics in Group Communication 
and Sustainability at Danfoss. Comments or questions can be addressed to     
Head of Analytics, Sara Vad Sørensen at: sara.sorensen@danfoss.com.
Sector integration is an enabler of energy eﬀiciency and 
electrification and can together with the build-out of renewables 
decarbonize the power supply to cities. In urban areas, the high 
density of buildings, infrastructure, and services makes it possible 
to connect urban energy-consumers with energy-producers 
and convert and store energy. Supermarkets, data centers, 
and wastewater facilities can all be turned from heavy energy 
consumers into energy suppliers. 
Implementation of existing technology for buildings, transport, 
and sector integration can bridge half the gap in the urban GHG 
emissions reductions needed for a 1.5°C pathway.10 
Energy eﬀiciency. If all urban areas and cities in Europe, the US, 
and China invested in energy-eﬀicient heating and cooling of 
buildings, this would contribute 20% of the emissions reductions 
needed in urban areas to reach the 1.5°C target of the Paris 
Agreement.8 Reducing energy waste is possible across sectors and 
the technologies to do this are already accessible. 
Electrification of urban transport needs a drastic acceleration. 
Similarly, an urgent political focus on the potential of electrifying 
the whole transport sector – including both maritime transport and 
heavy vehicles – is pivotal. If all urban areas and cities in Europe, 
the US, and China electrified their private and public transport, 
this would contribute 28% of the emissions reductions needed 
in urban areas to reach the 1.5°C target of the Paris Agreement.9 
As we will see, technology for the electrification of cars, buses, 
and trucks, as well as marine equipment and transport such as city 
boats, ferries, and cranes already exist.
These are the key takeaways
Only got 
2 minutes?
 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
 4 


--- page 4 ---
5  
 6 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
On the left is a roadmap for decarbonizing cities. 
In the following three chapters, we will explore 
concrete areas that come together to constitute 
the main levers in decarbonizing cities. 
In Chapter 1, we look at the emissions from the 
heating and cooling of the buildings where we 
live, work, and spend our free time. 
In Chapter 2, we review the opportunities for 
decarbonizing the transport sector – from 
heavy-duty construction vehicles and the 
cars and buses that get us from A to B, to the 
infrastructure and traﬀic at the ports of the city.
In Chapter 3, we look at some of the often-
overlooked aspects of the carbon footprint of 
cities, such as wastewater facilities handling 
sanitation, supermarkets providing us with food 
and household supplies, and data centers that 
serve as the digital infrastructure of cities. What 
is common for these three sites is that they all 
showcase the potential of utilizing the world’s 
largest untapped source of energy: excess heat.
Chapter 4 sums up the three main levers of 
decarbonizing cities, while Chapter 5 presents 
concrete policy recommendations that can 
accelerate the deployment of these technologies. 
                
The carbon 
footprint 
of cities –                   
a roadmap
Heating and cooling
Transport
Energy supply
1
3
2
Decarbonizing 
cities


--- page 5 ---
7  
 8 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Decarbonizing 
heating and 
cooling in      
the city
Our roadmap for decarbonizing cities starts in 
the buildings where we live, work, and spend 
most of our time. Our homes, oﬀices, hospitals, 
schools, and factories all require energy for 
power, heating, and cooling. Globally, buildings 
are the second largest source of energy-related 
carbon emissions. In total, 28% of global energy-
related CO2 emissions come from day-to-day 
energy consumption in buildings.11 And in urban 
areas, buildings can often account for over 50% 
of emissions.12
As climate change progresses and temperatures 
inevitably rise, demand for energy in buildings 
to maintain ambient conditions is predicted to 
increase further. High temperatures and heat 
waves have already begun to drive demand for 
air conditioning and will continue to do so.13 As 
the world’s population continues to grow, so 
will the expanse of buildings needed to house 
and service growing communities. Reducing 
emissions from buildings is therefore critical if we 
are to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement.
An eﬀective strategy for decarbonizing buildings 
must address both the energy supply and 
demand requirements. We must simultaneously 
ensure that energy sources for heating and 
cooling buildings are decarbonized, while also 
making eﬀorts to reduce the overall demand for 
energy from buildings. 
According to the IEA, if we are to achieve 
net-zero emissions by 2050, nearly 85% of 
buildings must be zero-carbon-ready, meaning 
highly energy eﬀicient and using decarbonized 
energy.14 To achieve this goal, most existing 
buildings would require retrofits by 2050 and 
all new buildings must be built as zero-carbon-
ready by 2030. But we are currently oﬀ track: 
as of September 2022, retrofitting rates for 
existing buildings were around 1% and need to 
double, and only 5% of new buildings were zero-
carbon-ready.15 However, solutions to reach the 
necessary eﬀiciency in buildings already exist.  
To reduce the energy intensity of buildings we 
need to look at both passive and active measures 
that span space heating and cooling, lighting, 
ventilation, and water. 
Passive measures, such as architectural design 
or improvements to the building envelope, can 
play an important role in reducing the demand 
for heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting, and 
other energy-intensive processes. In this paper, 
however, we will focus on active measures.
Active measures achieve energy savings by 
measuring, monitoring, and controlling a 
building’s energy usage. While installing energy-
eﬀicient lighting or heating is essential to 
reducing overall energy use, active measures 
must also be implemented to ensure that the 
lighting or heating is only switched on according 
to demand. Whether we look at retrofitting 
existing buildings or create new, active measures 
can have an enormous, fast, and cost-attractive 
energy-saving potential that is far from realized 
today. In the following pages, several existing 
technologies with large energy-saving potential 
are presented. And while geographic location 
often dictates which active measures make most 
sense (e.g., heating vs. cooling), the following 
examples are particularly relevant in the context 
of heating buildings.
Buildings
Decarbonizing 
heating and  
cooling


--- page 6 ---
9  
 10 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Thermostats
Save 7% of final energy in a              
multi-family building
One of the simplest ways to save energy is to maintain a room’s temperature 
level automatically by using a thermostat. Simple as they may be, thermostatic 
radiator valves save up to 7% of final energy in a multi-family building with a 
payback time of one year.16 However, many buildings still do not utilize this 
simple measure. Across the EU, thermostatic radiator valves have the potential 
to save 130 TWh of heating energy per year without aﬀecting the thermal 
comfort of households.17 The energy savings can be increased even further with 
an electronic thermostat which is regulated digitally and can be set according 
to occupant behavior - for example, by lowering the room temperature when a 
building is empty.
Hydronic balancing
Save 10% of final energy in a            
multi-family building
Many heating or cooling units utilize a hydronic system that transfers water 
through pipes and radiators to heat or cool buildings. The flow resistance inside 
the system is – unless controlled – fluctuating. This causes radiators closer 
to the pump to become warmer than their intended temperature, meanwhile 
radiators further from the pump are cooler. This ineﬀiciency means that water is 
often overheated and larger pumps are installed to accommodate people living 
far from the pump. Besides installing thermostats, the installation of automatic 
balancing valves with diﬀerential pressure control leads to ideal indoor 
temperatures, reduced operating costs, and higher eﬀiciency.
In a multi-family building, a hydronic balancing system can save up to 10% on 
final energy with a payback time of one year.18
Danfoss impact  
Issue no. 3
9  
Model predictive controls 
Save up to 20% in a building’s        
energy costs
Model predictive controls are driven by artificial intelligence using building, 
weather, and user data to predict heating and ventilation demand. By utilizing 
such controls, buildings can pre-heat ahead of peak hours, or lower heating 
when the sun is about to shine on the building facades, thus saving energy. 
Observations on 100,000 flats equipped with this technology based mainly in 
Finland show the energy consumption of heating and ventilation was reduced 
on average by over 7% and 10% respectively. 
Meanwhile, by shifting the consumption to the most economical period the 
system ensures up to 20% savings in a building’s energy costs.19 In 2021, a 
London Local Authority installed model predictive controls in eight residential 
buildings. In the first 11 months of operation, the technology paid back its initial 
cost and saved 600 MWh of heat – the equivalent of heating 50 homes in the UK 
for a year. 
Heat pumps 
Save 2/3 of the electricity 
used compared to traditional                  
electric equipment
Heat pumps upgrade the low temperature heat stored in the air, bedrock, 
ground, or groundwater to a usable temperature level. Buildings are consuming 
this by heating our living spaces, oﬀices, and water. Because they upgrade heat 
instead of generating it, on average heat pumps can keep a building warm with 
only a third of the electricity used by traditional electric equipment. 
Heat pumps can also provide cooling, eliminating the need for a separate air 
conditioner for the 2.6 billion people who will live in regions requiring both 
heating and cooling by 2050. The IEA estimates that heat pumps have the 
potential to reduce global CO2 emissions by at least 500 million tons in 2030 
– equal to the annual CO2 emissions of all cars in Europe today.20 Although 
heat pump adoption has increased in recent years, it still represented less than 
10% of global heating equipment sales in 2021, while fossil fuel equipment 
accounted for 45%.21 And this is despite lower energy costs for the average 
household or business using a heat pump than for those using a gas boiler.22
 10 
Danfoss impact 
Issue no. 3


--- page 7 ---
11  
 12 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Transport – whether driving the car to work, 
transporting the goods we consume, or oﬀ-
highway vehicles constructing the city – depends 
on vast amounts of energy. Transportation 
accounts for 37% of CO2 emissions from end-use 
sectors and has the highest reliance on fossil 
fuels.23 In major cities, 33% of all greenhouse 
gas emissions are generated by transport.24 
Urban transport also has a negative impact on 
human health by emitting noise and air pollution 
in cities, as well as generating around half of 
the global nitrogen oxide (NOX) emissions.25              
Each year, 7 million people die prematurely due 
to air pollution.26 
Decarbonizing 
urban transport
Heavy-duty               
vehicles
Marine 
transport
Passenger 
vehicles
In this section, we assess the challenges and 
possibilities for curbing emissions from urban 
transport. More specifically, we zoom in on three 
major components of urban transport emissions: 
passenger cars, heavy-duty vehicles,27 and the 
transport in and on the ports of the city. 
Electrifying passenger 
vehicles
Road transport accounts for 77% of transport 
emissions.28 Most of this comes from passenger 
vehicles,29 which contribute more than half of 
global transport emissions.30 Fortunately, the 
sales of electric cars have seen exponential 
growth in the last few years. Electric cars are 
becoming more aﬀordable with faster charging, 
and they are expanding in performance. Global 
electric car sales grew to 14% of total car sales in 
2022, up from only 1% in 2017, and are on track 
to make up 18% of sales in 2023.31 IEA expects 
electric cars to make up around one in three 
new cars by 2030, which would mean a cut in 
annual emissions equivalent to Germany’s entire 
economy. In China, Europe, and the US, the 
average share of electric cars in total sales is set 
to rise to around 60% by 2030.32
Aﬀordable electric passenger vehicles and 
accessible charging infrastructure are pivotal for 
achieving sustainable transportation in cities. 
Indeed, the transition to electric cars is already 
being pushed by governments. For example, 
the Norwegian government aims for all new 
passenger cars to be electric, plug-in, or hybrid 
cars by 2025,33 while the Californian government 
aims for 2035.34
Despite these encouraging recent developments, 
some obstacles to the electric car transition 
still lie ahead - in particular, the critical minerals 
used in the batteries of electric vehicles. 
Modern batteries are made of many minerals, 
such as lithium, nickel, and cobalt. The limited 
availability of these elements is expected to pose 
a challenge to worldwide adoption of electric 
vehicles.35 One analysis looking at electric vehicle 
uptake in China – the world’s largest market 
for electric vehicles – suggests that the high 
prices of critical materials could hinder electric 
vehicle uptake in China, driving a 28% increase 
in carbon emissions from road transport over 
2020-2060. Furthermore, a cost surge on lithium, 
cobalt, nickel, and manganese would cause the 
percentage of vehicles on China’s roads that are 
electric to drop from 49% to 35% in 2030 and 
67% to 51% in 2060.36
However, as can be seen in the case on 
electrification of cars, energy eﬀicient 
technologies exist that can accelerate the market 
uptake of electric vehicles and reduce the stress 
on mineral resources.
“Policy makers, industry executives, 
and investors need to be highly vigilant 
and resourceful in order to [...] ensure 
sustainable supplies of critical minerals.”
37 
Fatih Birol, IEA Executive Director
 12 
Danfoss impact 
Issue no. 3
Decarbonizing 
transport


--- page 8 ---
 14 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
13  
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Figure 1: Passenger vs. Heavy-duty vehicles
The power electronics used in an electric car 
can have a significant impact on the energy 
eﬀiciency of the car. More specifically, 
energy eﬀicient power modules can impact 
the amount of power that is lost when power 
is transferred from the battery to the motor.38 
In an electric car, electricity is stored in a 
battery and then passed through a drivetrain, 
while the power module controls the flow of 
power between the battery and the electric 
motor. New generation modules made from 
silicon carbide – the so-called SiC power 
modules – reduce the power lost as heat 
and oﬀer 60-80% less energy loss compared 
to traditional ones. SiC modules can also 
help reduce the weight and size of other 
components such as the cooling system, 
which can further reduce the overall weight 
of the vehicle and thereby make it more 
energy eﬀicient. 
Energy eﬀicient power modules can 
eﬀectively reduce the size of the batteries 
by 5-10% depending on the technical 
specifications and application of the car. 
Alternatively, the lower power loss increases 
the driving range by 4-10% without even 
modifying battery sizes, further growing 
the acceptance of electric mobility                       
in society.39,40,41,42
Case: Energy eﬀiciency can 
accelerate the electrification 
of cars
5-10%
reduction in battery 
size possible through 
energy eﬀiciency 
measures
Decarbonizing       
heavy-duty vehicles
While the sales of passenger cars have seen a 
drastic acceleration, the same is not true for 
heavy-duty vehicles. Trucks, city buses, and long-
distance buses are responsible for over 6% of 
total EU GHG emissions and more than 25% of 
GHG emissions from road transport.43 The picture 
is arguably the same across the rest of the 
world. In China for instance, heavy-duty vehicles 
emitted about half of GHG emissions across all 
vehicle types.44 
In 2022, nearly 66,000 electric buses were 
sold worldwide, representing only about 4.5% 
of all bus sales. Electrifying municipal bus 
fleets presents a unique opportunity to reduce 
emissions in the transportation sector while 
improving air quality in cities.45 Moreover, if we 
are to reach the goals of the Paris Agreement, 
investment in e-buses will need to double during 
the next two decades.46
Looking at other heavy-duty vehicles such as 
construction machinery, there is also far from 
the same progress in electrification compared 
to electric passenger vehicles (see Figure 1). 
Immediate attention to the possibilities for 
reducing carbon emissions from heavy vehicles is 
necessary to reach global climate goals. Energy 
eﬀiciency is the key to cut emissions immediately 
and paves the way for electrification of heavy-
duty transport. Let us take a look at construction 
machinery, and more specifically the excavator, 
to understand the challenges and opportunities.
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
2015
2020
EV share of new vehicle sales 
(Passenger vehicles)
EV share of vehicles on the road 
(Passenger vehicles)
EV share of new vehicle sales 
(Heavy-duty vehicles*)
EV share of vehicles on the road 
(Heavy-duty vehicles*)
2025
2030
2035
2040
Source: BNEF. 2021
*Heavy-duty vehicles are off road vehicles above 15 tonnes.


--- page 9 ---
 16 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
15  
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Construction machines worldwide emit 400MT 
of CO2 per year,47 as much as the emissions from 
international aviation.48 50% of that comes from 
excavators.49 At first glance, it may seem simple 
to follow the same path as passenger cars: make 
them battery-electric and charge them with 
energy derived from renewable sources. But this 
is easier said than done.
First, compared to passenger cars, excavators 
need to work much harder and for much 
longer between charges, meaning that they 
need extremely large batteries to match the 
productivity of the diesel equivalent. As a 
result, fully electric excavators consume a lot 
of resources for the battery and are expensive 
to buy, so the total cost of ownership over their 
lifetime still exceeds the diesel machines by a 
large margin. 
Second, not all excavator work sites have enough 
charging energy to support a fleet of electrically 
powered excavators. Those sites that do have 
lots of electrical power onsite are often very 
big, like quarries, and require battery-swapping 
in the field at the beginning and end of every 
shift and charging those back in the depot. 
Given that the batteries weigh tons, this poses             
operational challenges. 
Third, there is not unlimited green energy in the 
grid and the amount of additional green energy 
needed for electrifying the excavator fleet is not 
trivial: a rough estimate says that if all the world’s 
excavators were electric, they would consume 
as much energy as is generated by all the world’s 
oﬀshore wind turbines today.50 
Despite these challenges, the industry is already 
pushing on electrification. Today, very small 
electric machines up to 3 tons exist and often 
work in city-center locations. However, to make 
a substantial impact on CO2 emissions in the 
sector, solutions for larger machines over 10 
tons are needed, as these machines account 
for only 56% of units sold but contribute 92% of      
CO2 emissions.51
The key to decarbonizing these machines 
are energy eﬀicient technologies that can 
immediately reduce the diesel use in excavators 
and at the same time address some of the 
challenges for electrification. Improving 
eﬀiciency reduces the size of batteries 
required, reduces the amount of charging 
power required, and reduces the amount of 
renewable energy generation required to make       
the same impact.
In the case on construction sites, we take a look 
at the excavator to understand which solutions 
can be employed today to reduce energy waste 
and diesel consumption in heavy vehicles, paving 
the way for a full electrification of these vehicles, 
as can be seen in Figure 2. Until recently, low-
emission construction sites seemed unattainable, 
but market innovations are gathering speed and 
changing the construction industry. Many cities 
around the world are now prioritizing diﬀerent 
ways to reduce emissions and pollution from the 
construction sector. However, the pace needs 
to increase instantly if we are to reach global 
climate goals.
The scale of global construction activity is 
set to increase significantly in the decades 
to come, and decarbonizing heavy-duty 
vehicles such as excavators is critical if cities 
are to curb GHG emissions.
Today’s excavator systems are only 30% 
eﬀicient, meaning that 70% of the energy the 
engine produces is wasted instead of helping 
the excavator bucket move any earth. To 
identify the energy losses in a heavy vehicle, 
it is not enough to look at the engine of 
the vehicle. In construction machines, a 
hydraulic system consists of a pump that 
pressurizes fluids (oil) to transmit the power 
from the engine to perform work such as 
lifting or digging. Whether the vehicle has 
an electric motor or combustion engine, the 
energy consumption of the vehicle can be 
reduced significantly by introducing energy 
eﬀiciency measures. For instance, energy 
consumption can be reduced significantly 
when the vehicle is not operating through 
solutions such as variable displacement 
pumps, digital displacement, variable speed 
pumps, and decentralized drives. In addition, 
the losses on the hydraulic system that 
are essential to many oﬀ-highway vehicles 
can be reduced significantly with existing 
technologies, and energy recovery systems 
can recycle energy in the system.
Such energy eﬀiciency measures enable 
excavators to deliver more work with a 
smaller engine and less fuel and reduces 
the capacity of the battery needed to 
electrify them by up to 24.8%.52 
The technology is developing fast and some 
of these measures can deliver fuel savings 
of 15-30% in excavators over 15 tons while at 
the same time increasing the work capacity 
of the machines. Soon it will be possible 
to apply this technology on all sizes of 
excavators and even reach fuel savings of up 
to 50%.53 
Case: Decarbonizing 
construction sites
15-30%
fuel savings through 
energy eﬀiciency


--- page 10 ---
17  
 18 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
In an electrified and 
energy eﬀicient excavator  
it requires an input of 1.9 
units of energy to produce  
1 unit of productive work.
In an ineﬀicient  
ICE excavator  
it requires an input of 8.3 
units of energy to produce  
1 unit of productive work. 
In an electrified excavator 
with a conventional  
hydraulics system it requires 
an input of 3.7 units of 
energy to produce 1 unit  
of productive work.
Digital 
Displacement® 
Electric drive
1.7
Electric drive
Hydraulics 
3.3
Electric Input
Productive work 
1.9
1
Electric Input
By combining electrification and energy eﬀicient solutions, only 
25% of energy input is needed to shift the same amount of earth. 
This example highlights the potential in energy eﬀiciency and 
electrification in a 16-ton conventional excavator.
Figure 2. The fully electric excavator
Productive work 
Energy loss
3.7
Energy loss
1
Hydraulics 
Diesel engine
Diesel Input
Productive work 
1
3.3
8.3
Energy loss
Energy loss
Energy loss
Energy loss
Decarbonizing 
marine transport and 
equipment
Ports act as vital hubs for the transportation of 
goods and people in urban areas. Almost 80% 
of global trade by volume and 70% by value is 
carried out by international shipping and these 
goods all pass through ports every day.54 The 
shipping industry contributes around 2.9% of 
global greenhouse gas emissions55 and domestic 
shipping accounts for about one-fifth of this.56
There is a large untapped potential for 
decreasing the climate impact from the 
maritime sector, and the opportunities are ripe 
for the taking. Ships typically have a lifespan 
of 25-30 years and are commonly powered 
by diesel engines.57 This carbon lock-in can 
be addressed by retrofitting the existing fleet, 
immediately reducing fuel consumption and 
thus the carbon footprint of the sector. In 
addition, the solutions already exist to fully 
electrify vessels as well as the operation at 
ports, and green shore supply can reduce the 
emissions from ships while they are at berth. 
It is worth noting that while ports may not be 
included in a city's carbon budget, emissions 
from ports have significant negative impacts 
on the local environment and public health, 
and urban decision-makers often have a good 
possibility for working with port authorities to 
reduce emissions and pollution from ports.
Looking at the operation at ports, both straddle 
carriers and cranes operate at ports for many 
hours a day. A straddle carrier is a ground-
based vehicle used for loading and unloading 
containers from ships and stacking and 
transporting containers for short distances.   
While both cranes and straddle carriers 
traditionally have been powered by diesel 
engines, it is entirely possible to increase the 
eﬀiciency of these vehicles and fully electrify 
them with current technology. 
For instance, Shanghai Zhenhua Heavy Industries 
Co. (ZPMC) is one of the largest port machinery 
manufacturers in the world. The company oﬀers 
many hybrid and fully electric port machinery 
products. One such product is the electrified 
straddle carrier, which is already in operation at 
the Port of Barcelona in Spain and South Africa’s 
Durban Port.
Electrifying port equipment can lower emissions, 
reduce noise levels, and lower operating costs 
compared to diesel-powered equipment.
Similarly, solutions for curbing emissions from 
marine vessels already exist. Electrification of 
vessels operating on short journeys close to 
shores, such as ferries, tugboats, and boats 
transporting food is possible already today. These 
vessels can fully operate on battery power and 
be charged while standing idle in ports using   
energy sources.
In Grovfjord, Norway, salmon farming is a major 
driver of the local economy. In the fjord, one of 
the world’s first fully electric work boats – Astrid 
Helene - is now operating. The boat is packed 
with heavy equipment, including a crane. 
However, because the boat is fully electric, it 
operates with no engine noise and no diesel 
fumes. This can be copied in work boats in cities 
all over the world.58 
In many cities, ferries are vital for the transport 
of passengers, goods, and vehicles over short 
sea and inland routes. In 2019, an estimated 4.27 
billion passengers and 373 million vehicles were 
transported by ferries worldwide, most of which 
are in Asia.59 Most ferries burn diesel, which 
emits carbon and pollutes the air – a significant 
problem as many ferries operate close to city 
centers. Existing and cost-eﬀective solutions 
make it possible to build new ferries that are fully 
electric, as well as to retrofit existing ferries to 
save emissions.
Technological and battery improvements are 
now enabling larger vessels to operate on longer 
routes by using fully electric or hybrid-electric 
power. Furthermore, there is a large potential in 
reducing emissions from the ships while they 
are at berth, as can be seen in the Scheveningen 
Harbor case.


--- page 11 ---
19  
 20 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Ellen, the world’s 
longest ranging fully 
electric ferry
Between the islands of Ærø and Als in 
Southern Denmark, passengers and 
vehicles are transported by “Ellen” - a fully 
electric, medium-sized ferry. In operation, 
Ellen saves 80% of CO2 and 75-95% of 
air pollution when compared to the best 
technological alternative at the time of the 
evaluation, and 87% CO2 and 86-99% of air 
pollution when compared to an existing 
older ferry.63 The operational costs of Ellen 
are significantly lower than conventional 
alternatives, which ensures a payback time 
for the additional investment of 5-8 years  
of operation.64  
Retrofitting ferries in 
Taiwanese ports
The lifetime of vessels like ferries is between 
25-30 years – and sometimes even more. 
Therefore, retrofitting ferries through hybrid 
solutions is crucial for reducing emissions 
from sea transport. The Taiwanese port 
city of Kaohsiung relies on marine ferries 
to move goods through its busy port and 
the emissions from these ferries contribute 
significantly to local air pollution. 
To improve air quality, the city government 
mandated a Taiwanese shipping company 
to reduce emissions from its ferry fleet. 
That included the popular Cijian Island 
passenger ferry route. As a result, the 100-
ton, 23-meter-long ferry “Happiness,” which 
carries around 15,000 commutes every 
day, became Asia's first hybrid-electric ferry 
in 2017.60 The ferry’s new system ensures 
pure electric cruising for half the ferry’s 
operation time. Because of the initiative, 
Happiness has reduced its diesel fuel 
consumption by more than 30 percent,61 
and it is estimated that the fuel saving could 
be cut by as much as a half compared to 
the original diesel-powered ferry.62 Lowering 
diesel consumption reduces both GHG 
emissions and helps to improve air quality 
in the region. Happiness now sources 
energy from shore power charging, a 
source that can be decarbonized. 
Case: Green shore supply 
in Scheveningen Harbor, 
Netherlands
Shore supply can charge the batteries 
of fully electric and hybrid vessels using 
electric power from the grid while in port. 
Shore supply can also supply electricity from 
local grids to vessels powered by fossil fuels, 
instead of using the diesel generators on 
board, to power everything from ship coﬀee 
machines and communication equipment to 
lighting and ventilation.65 Using shore supply 
means no consumption of diesel while at 
berth, which in turn means significantly less 
local air and noise pollution. As ports are 
often located close to urban environments, 
this has a positive impact on local residents. 
Scheveningen Harbor is centrally located 
on the Dutch coast close to The Hague and 
provides berths for more than 7,500 vessels 
each year. It consists of three harbor areas. 
While shore power in the Second Harbor 
already exists for cutters, small fishing boats, 
and pleasure vessels, a major new industrial-
scale installation in the other two harbors 
extends capacity to many more vessels 
including large commercial vessels.
Thanks to the new shore power installation, 
ships can stop using noisy, pollutive diesel 
generators while berthed in harbor. This 
eliminates air pollution and reduces the 
noise and vibrations when ship engines are 
idle. On average, ships in Scheveningen 
Harbor consume more than 100 MWh per 
month via the new shore power supply.        
At an average of one liter per three kWh, 
this translates to a monthly savings of more 
than 33,000 liters of high-quality marine 
diesel.66 This results in dramatic reductions 
of air pollution and about 60% CO2 
equivalent savings with the current Dutch          
electricity mix.67  
33,000 
liters
of high-quality marine 
diesel saved per month
Danfoss impact 
Issue no. 3
 20 


--- page 12 ---
"Energy efficiency 
is about more than 
reducing demand. 
Without it, cities 
will not be able 
to accelerate 
electrification."
 22 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
21  
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Kim Fausing, President & CEO Danfoss
The future of 
decarbonized transport
The relevance of electrification spans far beyond electrifying passenger cars. 
The technology for the electrification and decarbonization of buses, trucks, 
and excavators, as well as marine equipment and vessels such as cranes, 
straddle carriers, city boats, work boats, and ferries already exists.
Improved eﬀiciency can accelerate the electrification of transport. Both in 
passenger cars, heavy-duty vehicles, and in marine transport, eﬀiciency 
measures can reduce the size of the batteries needed thus limiting the raw 
material requirements. Increasing eﬀiciency can also bring down the demand 
for charging infrastructure and increase the productivity and range of               
the vehicle. 
Electrification is not a question of “all or nothing.” For some vehicles that 
cannot yet be fully electrified, such as construction machinery and larger ships, 
it is possible to downsize the diesel engine and electrify critical components of 
the machine, creating a significant benefit from the increased eﬀiciency of an 
electric system.
Vessels can be supplied with sustainable energy while at berth with 
technologies readily available, significantly reducing emissions and pollution in 
urban areas.


--- page 13 ---
23  
 24 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Decarbonizing 
energy supply 
in cities
On the last stop of the decarbonization roadmap, 
we zoom in on the supply of energy to cities. We 
will see how activities that play an integral part 
of the life in cities – such as shopping and waste 
management – can be decarbonized by looking 
at the energy use in cities holistically.  
The global energy crisis has triggered 
unprecedented momentum behind the build out 
of renewables. The world is now set to add as 
much renewable power in the next five years as it 
did in the past 20.68 
Wastewater 
facilities
Supermarkets
Data centers
Decarbonizing 
energy supply
Needless to say, scaling renewables will play a 
crucial role in decarbonizing cities, and even 
more renewable energy infrastructure is needed. 
However, if we are not eﬀicient in our use of 
green energy, expanding the use of renewables 
at the current pace will not be even near enough 
to reach global climate goals. 
Excess heat can provide for a substantial 
proportion of the heating and cooling needs 
in cities. In the EU alone, the amount of excess 
heat almost corresponds to the EU’s total energy 
demand for heat and hot water in residential 
and service sector buildings,69 and the picture 
is arguably the same globally. To utilize excess 
heat, a holistic approach to energy use in cities 
is crucial. You can read more on the potential of 
excess heat in Danfoss Impact Issue no. 2. 
What is excess heat? Every time a machine runs, 
heat is generated. Just think of the warmth 
behind your fridge. The same is true on a larger 
scale with all the supermarkets, data centers, 
factories, and wastewater facilities in the city. As 
we will see, this heat can be reused. 
Utilizing excess heat constitutes the third and 
crucial lever in the roadmap for decarbonizing 
cities. Below, we zoom in on three specific 
sources of excess heat in cities and explore how 
it can be used. 
A holistic approach to 
urban energy supply
Historically, excess heat from the likes of steel 
and power plants has been reused due to the 
very high temperatures. But as technology has 
evolved, many more sources that produce excess 
heat at lower temperatures have become viable 
to reuse, and this means that also cities without a 
large industry have numerous sources of excess 
heat that add up to a considerable amount of 
energy. Excess heat from wastewater facilities, 
data centers, supermarkets, and metro stations 
are examples of excess heat sources present in 
all cities. 
There are multiple ways to use excess heat. The 
simplest way to use excess heat is to reintegrate 
the heat into the same processes. One measure 
to use waste heat internally is by installing a 
heat recovery unit. Heat recovery units make 
waste heat usable for processes at a similar or 
lower temperature level. As can be seen in the 
supermarket case, the excess heat can be used 
to heat up the store and produce domestic hot 
water. However, the density of infrastructure in 
cities makes it possible to use excess heat even 
more systematically and in larger scale through 
sector integration and district energy. 
Sector integration, or sector coupling, refers to 
the process of optimizing the combination of 
at least two diﬀerent sectors of energy demand 
and production (i.e., electricity, heating, cooling, 
transport, and industrial processes). Sector 
integration is about maximizing synergies 
between sectors, as well as converting and 
storing energy. This can happen on a small 
and large scale through urban planning and 
district energy networks. Urban planning can 
leverage the potential of sector integration and 
excess heat by connecting energy producers 
with energy consumers through a smart grid. 
Large synergies can occur when a producer 
of excess heat, for instance a data center, is 
located close to entities that can buy and use 
large amounts of the excess heat (for example, 
horticulture). Looking at possibilities for such 
synergies between energy producers and users 
in urban planning is called industrial cluster 
planning and it contributes to decarbonizing our 
energy system. Furthermore, the collaboration 
between nearby companies has been shown to 
provide economic benefits to both the buyer and   
the seller.  
The benefits of sector integration can be 
increased even further through district energy. 


--- page 14 ---
 26 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
25  
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
District energy: 
Decarbonizing urban 
heating and cooling 
District energy is a collective system that 
supplies an entire area with heating or cooling. 
A district heating network taps into heat from 
a combination of sources, such as renewable 
sources (e.g., solar, geothermal, and biomass) 
and fossil sources (e.g., power plants) and 
distributes it through pipelines to end users 
in the form of heated water. A district cooling 
system, on the other hand, chills water at a 
central plant and then distributes it through 
pipelines to end users. 
The vast majority of global district energy 
production today relies on fossil fuels. According 
to the IEA, the world needs to double the share 
of green sources in district heating by 2030 to 
reach net zero.70 If we succeed, this will help 
slash GHG emissions from heat generation by 
more than one-third.  
Today, district energy systems enable a 
decarbonizable heat supply. One of the main 
strengths of district energy systems is their 
capacity to integrate diﬀerent heat sources 
that can push fossil fuels out of the heating and 
cooling mix. As the district energy technology 
evolves, more and more green heat sources are 
able to tap into the system. Today, the so-called 
4th generation district energy system allows very 
low-temperature sources of heat to be integrated 
into the district energy system and provides 
heating for new buildings that can operate at low 
temperatures. The fact that more and more green 
sources of energy can be used in district heating 
and cooling puts district energy systems at the 
center of the green transition. 
Another crucial benefit of district energy is that 
it supports balancing of the grid. One of the 
key challenges in decarbonizing our grid and 
increasing electrification is ensuring that supply 
matches demand. By looking at the energy 
system holistically and linking diﬀerent energy 
sources, district energy allows for flexible use 
of power. It enables discrepancies in supply and 
demand to be evened out so we can exploit the 
full capacity of the grid. Balancing the peaks will 
be particularly important as we increase the use 
of renewables and electrification takes place. 
In a district cooling system, chilled water 
is supplied from a central cooling utility 
to commercial and residential buildings 
through pipelines. The cold water for the 
district cooling is supplied by free, natural 
cold-water resources – sea, lakes, rivers, or 
underground reservoirs – or is produced 
from waste heat from power generation or 
industries, or via central electric chillers. 
The cold water in the district cooling system 
can be produced at night and distributed 
at peak hours during the day. This reduces 
the need for chiller capacity during peak 
demand hours and reduces operating 
costs, as electricity is cheaper and ambient 
temperatures are lower at night.
Around 10% of the world’s electricity 
demand comes from space cooling and 
IEA estimates that by 2050, around two-
thirds of the world’s households could 
have an air conditioner.71 According to 
international studies, the demand for 
cooling of commercial and residential 
buildings will grow exponentially in the 
years to come, especially in high-income 
countries and emerging economies in India, 
China, and Indonesia.72 However, district 
cooling systems use half as much energy 
as air conditioners and will also reduce 
the consumption of the environmentally 
damaging F-gasses.73 
Existing district cooling systems in cities 
like Paris, Dubai, Helsinki, Copenhagen, and 
Port Louis have proved that district cooling 
can be more than twice as eﬀicient as 
traditional, decentralized systems.74 In Dubai, 
for instance, 70% of electricity is consumed 
by air conditioners, and in order to meet 
the cooling demand, the city has developed 
one of the world’s largest district cooling 
networks. By 2030, 40% of the city’s cooling 
demand will be met by district cooling.75 
Case: District cooling systems 
use half as much energy as air 
conditioners 


--- page 15 ---
 28 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
27  
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Data centers: from 
energy users to energy 
producers
There are thousands of data centers across 
the world, many of which are in cities.76 Data 
centers are simply buildings that provide space, 
power, and cooling for network infrastructure 
and are filled with varying amounts of servers. 
As data has become the lifeblood of today’s 
global digital economy, data centers have 
become critical to the functioning of our day-
to-day lives and activities. Data centers are also 
heavy consumers of electricity. Powering and 
cooling the thousands of servers requires a lot 
of electricity. According to the IEA, data centers 
consumed 220-320 TWh of electricity in 2021, 
or around 1% of global final electricity demand77 
– this is enough electricity to power about 20 to 
30 million US households.78 To reduce the carbon 
footprint, it is crucial to both optimize the energy 
eﬀiciency of the cooling systems in the data 
centers and to use the excess heat from the data 
centers. There are multiple examples showing 
how excess heat from data centers can be reused 
to heat nearby buildings through a microgrid 
or can be exported to the broader district       
energy network. 
In the city of Frankfurt am Main, there are several 
projects in the pipeline working towards assisting 
the city in taking excess heat from data centers 
and using it towards its entire heat demand 
of private households and oﬀices. It has been 
estimated that the waste heat from the data 
centers in Frankfurt could, by the year 2030, 
cover the city’s entire heat demand stemming 
from private households and oﬀice buildings.79   
In Dublin, Amazon Web Services has built 
Ireland’s first custom-built sustainable solution 
to provide low-carbon heat to a growing Dublin 
suburb. Initially, the recently completed data 
center will provide heat for 47,000m2 of public 
sector buildings. It will also provide heat for 
3,000m2 of commercial space and 135 aﬀordable 
rental apartments. This project will reduce the 
CO2 emissions by 1,500 tons per year.80 
Urban wastewater 
facilities as energy 
producers
The provision of water and sanitation is an 
indispensable yet often overlooked part of 
the urban infrastructure. It takes tremendous 
amounts of energy to provide citizens with 
access to clean drinking water and sanitation. 
Wastewater treatment plants are present in most 
cities around the world. And since they’re often 
operated by municipalities, they can eat up 20% 
of municipal electricity bills.81
There is significant potential for energy savings 
in the water sector through a systematic use of 
excess energy. Wastewater contains significant 
amounts of embedded energy. Sludge can 
be extracted from wastewater and pumped 
into digesters. These produce biogas – mostly 
methane – that can then be burned to make 
heat and electricity. Before the cleaned water 
is released, it can be cooled down with a heat 
pump, which supplies heat to the local district 
heating network. Consequently, wastewater 
treatment plants have the potential to be turned 
from energy consumers to energy producers. 
Case: Producing energy from 
wastewater
In the city of Aarhus, Denmark, the 
Marselisborg Wastewater Treatment Plant 
(WWTP), which is operated by Aarhus Vand, 
has managed to reduce energy consumption 
while simultaneously increasing energy 
production. In the period from 2016 and 
2021, Marselisborg WWTP produced close to 
100% more energy than needed for treating 
wastewater. The energy produced matched 
the needs for the entire water cycle of a 
200,000-person city area, including both 
distributing drinking water and recovering 
wastewater from dwellings, thereby 
essentially decoupling water from energy. 
The return on this investment was 4.8 years. 
Process optimization and digitalization is 
estimated to have contributed to 70% of    
the improvements.82  
The United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goal 6.3 advocates for a 50% reduction of 
untreated wastewater by 2030.83 Equipping 
existing and future wastewater treatment 
plants with state-of-the-art technologies 
could save 300 million tons of CO2 
equivalent emissions per year. Furthermore, 
it would save a yearly 350 TWh of energy,84 
which is about one tenth of Germany’s 
energy supply.85 Lastly, surplus heat from 
eﬀluents can be pumped to district heating 
networks, potentially providing 10 to 15% of 
the global residential heat demand.86 
300
million tons
of CO2-equivalent 
emissions can be 
saved per year


--- page 16 ---
28% emission reductions will come from transport, 20% from heating and cooling buildings, and 52% from other 
sectors. Transport cannot reach zero emissions.91
Mt CO2e
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
2020 emissions 
sector split
Emissions from other sectors
-20%           
of total
-28%           
of total
Emissions from buildings                 
(Heating/cooling)
Emissions from transport
2050 1.5°C pathways               
emissions sector split
Save energy. 
Electrify. 
Integrate.
Three steps to decarbonize cities
Looking at the various examples and sectors 
examined above, we can see three key trends 
driving a successful a green transition in cities:   
1) Save energy, 2) Electrify, and 3) Integrate.
Based on International Energy Agency (IEA) 
and IPCC scenarios, a Navigant analysis has 
quantified technology uptake on a 1.5°C pathway 
for a selection of cities in Europe, the US, and 
China.90 Emissions from transport and from 
heating and cooling of buildings account for 
more than half of the urban emissions. For cities 
to reach the 1.5°C goal in 2050, 28% of emissions 
must be cut from transport, 20% from heating 
and cooling buildings, and 52% from other 
sectors, including electrification of heavy-duty 
vehicles. The study by Navigant reveals that 
energy eﬀicient buildings and electrification of 
transport – both enabled by sector integration 
– can bridge half the gap in greenhouse gas 
emissions reductions needed for staying below 
the 1.5°C target. And this is considering only 
existing technologies. Adding to this, energy 
eﬀicient measures in other sectors such as in 
heavy vehicles can contribute further. Let’s take 
a closer look at these three main drivers of urban 
emission cuts.
 30 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
29  
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Figure 3: Towards 1.5°C goal in urban areas
Supermarkets are an integral part of cities 
around the world, providing convenient 
access to food and household supplies. 
However, they are also among the most 
energy-intensive commercial buildings.87  
In the UK, supermarkets consume 
approximately 3% of the nation’s electricity 
production.88 Keeping food fresh in cooling 
displays and freezers accounts for most of 
the energy consumption in a supermarket. 
It might sound counterintuitive, but cooling 
displays, freezers, and fridges produce a 
significant amount of heat. Anyone who 
has ever felt the warmth behind their fridge 
can confirm that. These cooling systems 
generate significant amounts of excess heat, 
which is often released into the atmosphere. 
But it does not need to be. Existing heat 
recovery technology can reuse the excess 
heat from the cooling displays to heat the 
water used in the supermarket as well as the 
building, and the excess heat not reused 
in the supermarket can be supplied to the 
district heating grid. In a small town in the 
Southern Denmark, the local supermarket 
SuperBrugsen has saved a considerable 
amount of energy by monitoring the cooling 
systems and by reusing and selling excess 
heat from the cooling systems. Since 2019, 
78% of SuperBrugsen’s heat consumption 
has been covered by reused heat from 
cooling processes. And the supermarket 
has sold 134 MWh to other local buildings 
through the district heating grid.89
Case: Your grocery shopping 
can heat your home
78%
of heat consumption 
covered by reused 
heat from cooling 
processes


--- page 17 ---
31  
 32 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Energy eﬀiciency measures can vastly reduce 
the amount of energy we use in our cities, save 
costs, and improve the health and well-being of 
urban citizens. Even though eﬀiciency measures 
are often associated with buildings, reducing 
energy waste is possible across many aspects of 
our lives in cities. As we saw at the construction 
site, better system eﬀiciency in heavy vehicles 
can reduce diesel consumption significantly and 
paves the way for electrification by reducing the 
size of the batteries needed in the more eﬀicient 
excavator. The same is true with passenger cars, 
where eﬀicient power modules can increase 
the range of the car, eﬀectively increasing the 
market uptake of electric vehicles. Furthermore, 
everything from data centers to wastewater 
facilities and supermarkets can reduce energy 
consumption by monitoring and adjusting  
energy use. 
However, if we look at buildings alone, they 
account for 28% of all global energy-related CO2 
emissions92 and 40% of urban primary energy 
use.93 Ineﬀicient heating and cooling of buildings 
are thus major causes for emissions and                    
air pollution globally.
For cities to stay below 1.5°C in 2050, 20% of 
the emissions reduction comes from buildings, 
including a range of energy eﬀiciency measures 
as can be seen in Chapter 1. This would equal 
curbing 2,500 Mt of annual emissions in 2020 
down to 0 Mt by 2050, which alone is 10% 
of today’s annual emissions of urban areas 
worldwide. This will require the steep uptake of 
existing technology for energy eﬀicient heating 
and cooling of buildings in cities. This means 
that the renovation rate of buildings – which is 
now often below 1% - will need to increase to 
approximately 2-3% for cities to reach the 1.5°C 
target.94 As such, several cities would need to 
triple their current renovation activities. And even 
then, the transformation of the existing building 
stocks might take 30 years or more.
Energy eﬀiciency is crucial for meeting our net-
zero targets. In fact, at a global level, enhanced 
energy eﬀiciency can provide one-third of 
the emission reduction needed for net zero.95 
Without a constant increase in energy eﬀiciency, 
we simply cannot build out renewables fast 
enough to meet the global climate goals. 
Energy eﬀiciency measures reduce the pressure 
on electricity grids and increase the share of 
renewable energy in the energy mix of cities. 
Furthermore, a stronger focus on energy waste 
will become increasingly important in the 
future battle against climate change due to 
growing populations and increasing demand 
for energy. For instance, cooling demands will 
increase significantly in cities, where the urban 
heat island eﬀect can increase temperatures 
by 3-4°C relative to surrounding areas. Adding 
to this, the benefits of energy eﬀiciency extend 
beyond climate. Enhanced eﬀiciency and related 
avoided energy demand could help contribute 
to reducing global household energy bills by at 
least USD 650 billion a year by 2030,96 while also 
promoting health and well-being for the billions 
of people who live in cities. 
Electrification will play a pivotal role in the green 
transition. Within urban transport specifically, 
there must be a drastic acceleration. Similarly, 
urgent attention is needed to accelerate the 
electrification of heavy transport as well as the 
marine industry. As we have seen, the required 
technologies already exist for full electrification 
of trucks, city boats, work boats, and ferries, as 
well as equipment operating at ports such as 
straddle carriers and cranes. 
If all urban areas in Europe, the US, and China 
electrified their private and public transport, 
they would contribute 28% of the emission 
reduction needed to reach the 1.5°C target 
of the Paris Agreement.97 This is without 
considering the potentials of electrifying heavy-
duty vehicles. However, the contribution varies 
Save energy
Electrify
by region and by city – 17% in Europe, 24% in the 
US, and 37% in China.98
As we progressively decarbonize our electricity 
generation, we will also need to electrify the 
industries and buildings in our cities that have 
previously been powered by fossil fuels. For 
example, replacing fossil fuel boilers with 
more eﬀicient heat pumps shows how energy 
eﬀiciency and electrification are in many cases 
two sides of the same coin. Electrification can 
lead to emissions reductions both by replacing 
fossil fuel energy with renewable electricity 
generation, and by saving energy due to the 
higher eﬀiciency of electric technologies. For 
instance, battery electric ships are almost twice 
as eﬀicient as ships with an internal combustion 
engine, and the higher eﬀiciency will oﬀset 
the higher price of electric ships considering a 
lifetime of 20-25 years.99 
By electrifying transport, we can reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions as well as air pollution, 
which increasingly threatens the health of 
citizens in cities. Electrification technologies 
that are currently available have the potential 
to reduce NOX emission by 90% per passenger 
kilometer by 2050.100
Sector integration is an enabler of energy 
eﬀiciency and electrification. In urban areas, 
the high density of buildings, infrastructure, 
and services means that we can connect urban 
energy consumers with energy producers and 
benefit from by-products such as excess heat. 
Sector integration is thus an eﬀective way to 
save vast amounts of energy, thereby increasing 
the share of renewable energy in the urban 
energy mix and accelerating the transition 
to an electrified energy system powered by   
renewable energy. 
Sector integration – and more specifically district 
energy systems – are an eﬀective way to convert 
and store energy and stabilize the grid, which 
will only be more important in the future as the 
fluctuating supply of renewable energy in the 
energy system will increase significantly. One of 
the key challenges in decarbonizing our grid and 
increasing electrification is ensuring that supply 
matches demand. By linking diﬀerent energy 
sources, sector integration with thermal energy 
storage allows for flexible use of energy and 
enables discrepancies in supply and demand to 
be evened out, so we can exploit the full capacity 
of the grid. 
As we saw in supermarkets, data centers, and 
wastewater facilities, there are many untapped 
sources of excess heat in our cities that can be 
used elsewhere. In fact, according to a recent 
estimate, excess heat from accessible sources 
in urban areas can cover 10% of the European 
Union’s total energy demand.101 By using excess 
heat for heating and cooling we can save the 
higher value (increasingly green) electricity for 
the transport and industrial sectors.
Integrate


--- page 18 ---
33  
 34 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
Policy
Recommendations
Systematic energy-saving strategies can save energy across sectors
•	
Reducing energy waste across sectors starts with mapping energy use to 
identify areas for improvement. Mandate energy planning, set ambitious 
and actionable short-, mid-, and long-term targets and plans, and a suitable 
regulatory framework to incentivize investments.
•	
Seize the quick wins first, as this can leverage finance for deeper renovation 
or sustainable new-build projects. Quick wins include optimizing the 
heating, cooling, and ventilation systems in the public building stock (see 
p. 10-11). These measures can be implemented immediately with very short 
payback times, and without compromising long-term energy-saving eﬀorts.
•	
Design and implement mandatory building energy codes for new and 
existing buildings to accelerate the transition towards zero-carbon-ready 
buildings and to increase the renovation rate of the building stock.
•	
Set minimum energy performance standards to support the uptake of 
energy eﬀicient equipment. Energy labels can further stimulate the market 
and are most suitable for oﬀ-the-shelf products with end consumers as main 
target groups.
•	
Set up long-term renovation strategies, including suitable regulation and 
incentives to stimulate renovation, to use renewable energy, and to boost 
renovation rates of existing buildings. Currently, renovation rates are often 
less than 1% and must rise to at least 2-3% per year in most regions to meet 
1.5°C by 2050.102 
•	
Incentivize the replacement of technical building systems running on fossil 
fuels for space heating, domestic hot water, and cooling with those using 
renewable energy, such as heat pumps or district energy networks.
•	
Ensure or facilitate access to funding for implementation. One way this 
can be done is by using or asking for innovative financial business models       
like ESCOs.  
A deep decarbonization of cities requires a comprehensive and holistic approach that involves 
multiple stakeholders, including local governments, businesses, and residents. In the following, 
some of the crucial initiatives are presented, although the list is not exhaustive. 
Electrify transport through investments, regulation, and incentives 
•	
Invest in the electrification of the city’s fleet now (vehicles, buses, city boats, 
ferries). Remember that also partial electrification of heavy transport entails 
significant cost and energy savings and can be done immediately. 
•	
Investing in electric charging infrastructure and incentivizing the installation 
of charging points at (semi-) public locations like oﬀice buildings, parking 
facilities, supermarkets, and tourist attractions. Introduce parking incentives 
and other fiscal incentives for moving toward electrifying transport.
•	
If the national policy allows it, use local regulation and permitting options to 
create low or zero-emissions construction sites and electrify last-mile inner-
city freight and goods delivery traﬀic. 
•	
Use franchise agreements with public transport operators to enforce      
zero-emission goals for buses, taxis, and more. 
•	
Incentivize the installation of shore supply in harbors and present a plan for 
how to address that all vessels use electric shore supply when at berth.
Holistic energy planning can leverage synergies between sectors 
•	
In general, mandatory heat and cooling planning will enable cities to assess 
the potential and make the best use of locally available resources. The 
planning must cover all urban energy system components – residential 
and service buildings, heat and power, industry, transport, water, and           
waste treatment.
•	
Depending on the existing energy system, energy planning can reveal both 
small-scale potential (such as forming the right incentives for heat recovery) 
and the potential of larger-scale opportunities, such as the rollout of district 
heating. It is crucial that the scope of the heat planning is wide and detailed, 
and also includes potential future sources of excess heat, such as Power-
to-X facilities.
•	
Expand and decarbonize district heating and cooling where possible, 
including combination with heat pumps, and lead the way by connecting 
public buildings.


--- page 19 ---
35  
 36 
Danfoss Impact 
Issue no. 3
Danfoss Impact  
Issue no. 3
References
1. IEA (2021). Empowering Cities for a Net Zero Future, p. 3
2. IEA (2021). Empowering Cities for a Net Zero Future, p. 3
3. Bloomberg (2023). Warming Above 1.5C Likely in Near Term Unless World Acts Now, UN Says
4. IPCC (2023). AR6 Synthesis Report: Climate Change, p. 16
5. UN General Secretary (2023). Antoniou Guterres: Comments on Release latest IPCC report.
6. IPCC (2023). AR6 Synthesis Report: Climate Change, p. 68
7. IPCC (2023). AR6 Synthesis Report: Climate Change, p. 22
8. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 6
9. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 18
10. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5C target in urban areas, p. 3
11. World Green Buildings (2019). Bringing embodied carbon upfront, p. 16
12. C40 Cities (2018). 19 Global Cities Commit to Make New Buildings ”Net-Zero Carbon” by 2030 
13. Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences (2022). In a hotter world, air conditioning isn’t a luxury, it’s a lifesaver.
14. IEA (2021). Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector, p. 143 
15. IEA (2022). Technology and Innovation: Pathways for Zero-carbon-ready Buildings by 2030 - Introduction
16. Ecofys (2017). Optimizing the energy use of technical building systems – unleashing the power of the EPBD’s Article 8, p. 55-60
17. Eu.bac (2017). White Paper on Room Temperature Controls, p. 4
18. Optimising the energy use of technical building systems, Ecofys, p. 59 (apo-nid205381.pdf )
19. Danfoss. Leanheat – for building owners  
20. IEA (2022). Heat Pumps, p. 110
21. IEA (2022). Heat Pumps
22. IEA (2022). Heat Pumps, p. 15
23. IEA (2022) Transport: Tracking progress
24. OECD (2020). Decarbonising Urban Mobility with Land Use and Transport Policies, p. 4 
25. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 17
26. WHO (2021). New WHO Global Air Quality Guidelines aim to save millions of lives from air pollution. 
27. European Commission (2014). Questions and Answers on the Commission strategy for reducing Heavy-Duty vehicles’ fuel consumption and CO2 emissions:  HDVs 
comprise of busses, trucks and coaches (more than 3.5 tonnes or 8 seats)
28. IEA (2022). Transport: Tracking progress
29. Due to a variance in terminology across sources, we refer to both “passenger vehicles” and “cars” in this section. Generally, cars, light trucks, and light vans are cate-
gorized as passenger vehicles, while heavy vans, city buses, long-distance buses, and semi-trucks (lorries) are categorized as “heavy duty vehicles” alongside construction 
vehicles and other large machinery. 
30. IEA (2022). Transport sector CO2 emissions by mode in the Sustainable Development Scenario, 2000-2030. 
31. IEA (2023). Global EV Outlook 2023: Catching up with climate ambitions, p. 14
32. IEA (2023). Global EV Outlook 2023: Catching up with climate ambitions, p. 15
33. Regjeringen.no (2021). Norway is electric
34. California Air Resources Board (2022). California moves to accelerate to 100% new zero-emission vehicle sales by 2035
35. The Economist (2023). Cobalt, a crucial battery material, is suddenly superabundant
36. Wang, H., Feng, K., Wang, P. et al. (2023). China’s electric vehicle and climate ambitions jeopardized by surging critical material prices. Nature Communications, 14 
(1246).
37. IEA (2022). Global electric car sales have continued their strong growth in 2022 after breaking records last year
38. Businesswire (2022). Global and China Automotive IGBT and SiC Industry Report 2022
39. IDTechEx (2023). Power Electronics for Electric Vehicles 2023-2033 (Sample pages) p. 6
40. Power Electronics Europe (2018). Issue 3 p 22-25. SiC-Based Power Modules Cut Costs for Battery-Powered Vehicles 
41. Power Electronic News (2022). The Role of SiC in E-Mobility
42. Danfoss calculations.
43. European Commission (2023). European Green Deal: Commission proposes 2030 zero-emissions target for new city buses and 90% emissions reductions for new 
trucks by 2040.
44. International Council on Clean Transportation (2022). The evolution of heavy-duty vehicles in China: A retrospective evaluation of CO2 and pollutant emissions from 
2012 to 2021., p. 4
45. GlobalNewsWire (2022). Global Electric Bus Markets Report 2022-2027 – Reduction in Battery Prices & Increasing Demand for Emission-Free and Energy-EfÏcient 
Mass Transit Solutions
46. World Resources Institute (2019). Barriers to Adopting Electric Buses, p. 5
47. IDTechEx (2022). Electric Construction Machines Vital for Greener Construction.
48. JRC (2022). CO2 emissions of all world countries.
49. KOMATSU (2010). Introduction of Komatsu genuine hydraulic oil KOMHYDRO HE.
50. Danfoss (2023). FPC2023 Danfoss, p. 12.
51. Danfoss (2023). FPC2023 Danfoss, p. 9.
52. Danfoss (2022). Danfoss Digital Displacement & Editron: An efÏcient electro-hydraulic system for mobile applications.
53. Construction Europe (2023). Danfoss Q&A: Technology to reduce excavator energy consumption. 
54. UNCTAD (2015). Review of Maritime Transport 
55. European Commission (2023). Reducing emissions from the shipping sector
56. IMO (2020). Fourth IMO Greenhouse Gas Study, p. 2, Table 1. The global shipping emissions are 1056 Mt CO2, the average emissions from vessel-based and voya-
ge-based international shipping are 829.5 Mt, leaving 226.5 Mt as domestic shipping emissions – about one fifth of the global shipping emissions. 
57. Safety4Sea (2020). Do you know what happens to a ship when it’s too old to sail anymore?
58. Danfoss (2019). Goodbye to NOx gases: on board a fully electric workboat.
59. Interferry (2021). Economic Impact of the global ferry industry, p. 4
60. SOIC (2019). Youtube video: Ferry happiness  
61. Happiness Is a Hybrid-Electric Ferry - IEEE Spectrum
62. Ship Technology (2017). New hybrid electric ferry launched in Taiwan.
63. Eferry (2020), E-ferry project - Evaluation of the E-ferry, p. 118-119. The CO¬2 and air pollution savings are derived from Table 52. E-ferry green electricity is consi-
dered zero emission, so the table presents absolute emissions. The savings are expressed as percentage reduction from an LMG50.1 to an e-ferry running on electricity from 
the Danish grid mix 2019. 
64. Eferry (2020), E-ferry project - Evaluation of the E-ferry, p. 108-109
65. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 22
66. Danfoss (2018). Scheveningen harbor environmentally upgrades with clean shore power, p. 2
67. Marine diesel: 3.10669 kg CO2e/Liter marine diesel (DEFRA conversion factors 2022) x 33,000 Litres saved marine diesel = 102,521 kg CO2e. Electricity: 0.402 kg 
CO2e/kWh (European Environmental Agency's Netherland GHG emission intensity of electricity generation) x 100,000 kWh = 40,200 kg CO2e. The savings are 61% 
from marine diesel emissions to electricity emissions. 
68. IEA (2022). Renewable power’s growth is being turbocharged as countries seek to strengthen energy security
69. Connolly, D., et al. (2013). Heat Roadmap Europe 2: Second Pre-Study for the EU27. Department of Development and Planning, Aalborg University, p. 54
70. IEA (2022). District Heating
71. IEA (2018). The Future of Cooling, p. 26 & 59
72. IEA (2018). The Future of Cooling, p. 11
73. Danfoss (2016). Making the case for district cooling, p. 3
74. Danfoss (2016). Making the case for district cooling, p. 3
75. MarkNtel (2023). UAE District Cooling Market Research Report: Forecast (2023-2028)
76. Statista (2022). Data Centers – statistics & facts
77. IEA (2022). Data Centres and Data Transmission Networks
78. EIA (2022). How much electricity does an American home use?. A US household uses 10,632 kWh/year. Datacenters consume 220-320 TWh/year and 1 TWh = 1x109 
kWh. 220x109 kWh / 10,632 kWh/household = 20x106 households and 320x109 kWh / 10,632 kWh/household = 30x106 household. Thus 20 to 30 million households can 
be powered by 220 to 320 TWh.
79. eco Association of the Internet Industry (2021). Data centres as Gamechangers for Urban Energy Supply: City of Frankfurt am Main Could Cover Most of its Heating 
Needs by 2030 with Waste Heat.
80. SDCC (2023). Tallaght District Heating Network and Energy Centre ofÏcially opened.
81. Copeland & Carter (2017). Energy-Water Nexus: The Water Sector’s Energy Use, Congressional Research Service, p. 6
82. Danfoss (2022). A path to an energy neutral water sector
83. United Nations (2022). Goal 6 Ensure access to water and sanitation for all 
84. DHI A/S (2022). Analysis of the potential contribution to energy and climate neutrality from Danish technology within the global wastewater sector, p. 4
85. IEA (2022). Europe. Germany’s total energy supply in 2020 was 11,654,314 TJ, equivalent to 3237 TWh.  350 TWh / 3237 TWh = 0.11, or about one tenth. 
86. DHI A/S (2022). Analysis of the potential contribution to energy and climate neutrality from Danish technology within the global wastewater sector, p. 4
87. Government of Canada (2019). Energy benchmarking for supermarkets and food stores
88. The Grocer (2022). How supermarkets can recycle energy to beat rising costs
89. Danfoss (2022). The local supermarket, the power of excess heat, p. 4
90. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 5: London (UK), Rotterdam (The Netherlands), New York (US), and Shanghai (China). 
91. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 5
92. World Green Buildings (2019). Bringing embodied carbon upfront, p. 16
93. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 6
94. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 7
95. IEA (2022). The Value of urgent action on energy efÏciency, p. 7
96. IEA (2022). The Value of urgent action on energy efÏciency, p. 3
97. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 18
98. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 18
99. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 22
100. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 17
101. Lygnerud, K. & Langer S. (2022). Urban Sustainability: Recovering and Utilizing Urban Excess heat. Energies 15(24), 9466
102. Navigant (2020). How to reach the 1,5 °C target in urban areas, p. 7


--- page 20 ---
whyee.com
Learn more about how energy eﬀiciency solutions  
can accelerate the green transition.
© Danfoss 2023 
