SOURCE: Source Documentation\district-energy-application-guide-district-energy-2018-master-en.pdf


--- page 1 ---
APPLICATION GUIDE
DISTRICT ENERGY 


--- page 2 ---
CONTENT
3
2
Introduction.................................................................................................................................................... 4
Definition of district energy............................................................................................................ 6
		
District Heating (DH)....................................................................................................................... 6
		
District Cooling (DC)........................................................................................................................ 7
		
Connection between heating and cooling........................................................................... 7
A brief history of district energy................................................................................................. 8
		
District heating.................................................................................................................................. 8
		
District cooling.................................................................................................................................10
Consumer installations.....................................................................................................................11
	
Direct systems...................................................................................................................................12
		
Indirect systems...............................................................................................................................13
	
Mixing loop connection...............................................................................................................16
	
Hot water production....................................................................................................................17
Heat transmission net........................................................................................................................20
		
Large consumers.............................................................................................................................20
District cooling...........................................................................................................................................21
Settlement of consumption and tariffs.............................................................................21
		
Smart meters....................................................................................................................................23
Load profiles globally............................................................................................................................24
Design and operation of the network.................................................................................26
	
A double pipe distribution system..........................................................................................26
	
Installation of underground pipes..........................................................................................30
	
SCADA, Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition.........................................................30
		
Network analysis and temperature optimisation..........................................................31
Generation of heating and cooling .......................................................................................33
	
Thermal needs..................................................................................................................................33
Energy conservation and impact on climate and environment................34
Combined heat and power generation..............................................................................36
	
Other available heat sources.....................................................................................................40
		
Generation of cooling in combination with heat and power....................................42
Water treatment.......................................................................................................................................44
Thermal energy storage systems.............................................................................................44
The Danish example.............................................................................................................................50
		
Smart citiies for the future.........................................................................................................54
Conclusion......................................................................................................................................................55
PREFACE
Access to energy has been a prerequisite for 
generations wishing to create healthy and 
sound living conditions for themselves and their 
offspring. To be able to live in a comfortable and 
warm home has always been desirable since 
early times. 
Energy is vital to the functioning of our socie-
ties. We need solutions that make it possible 
to combine sound economic growth with little 
environmental impact. District energy (district 
heating and cooling) is the key to sustainability. 
Its infrastructure enables the biggest carbon 
footprint reductions by allowing cities to utilise 
potential renewable energies and surplus heat 
that otherwise would be wasted, thereby sub-
stituting fossil fuels.
More than half of the energy we use for con-
ventional heating and cooling is wasted. The 
fundamental idea of district energy is simple: 
reusing/recycling surplus energy that otherwise 
would be wasted.
District energy systems are therefore essential 
for reducing CO2 emissions and increasing 
energy efficiency in our cities, communities and 
campuses.
The environmental, economic and social 
benefits of harvesting surplus heat and using 
local renewable energy sources make district 
heating and district cooling the sensible choice 
for communities seeking to promote economic 
growth while minimising the environmental 
consequences. 
Increasing urbanisation makes it vital to create 
solid systems which effectively and easily pro-
vide heating and cooling for future generations. 
District heating and cooling can offer a sub-
stantial solution to a number of the challenges 
that modern societies are facing these years. 
An increasing number of people choose to live 
in mega cities, which increases the load on the 
existing energy systems. 
As more and more societies are searching for 
renewable energy sources to utilise, challenges 
like fluctuations in the electric grid occur, as 
power is sometimes produced at times when 
there is no or little need for it. Here, district 
energy systems can “level” these fluctuations 
by providing energy storage possibilities. This is 
just one example of the numerous advantages 
that district energy systems offer. We hope that 
the content in this application guide will interest 
the reader enough for him/her to investigate 
this subject in more detail. We believe that 
these are optimal solutions for society’s imme-
diate and long-term requirements.  
Anders Nielsen
Application Manager 
Grundfos Commercial 
Building Services


--- page 3 ---
INTRODUCTION
5
4
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, global energy consumption 
has been increasing rapidly. This is a serious 
challenge to the supply security of sufficient 
amounts of energy at reasonable prices as well 
as for the local environment – particularly in 
large city areas – and not least for the global 
climate. Many people, governments and 
organisations around the world acknowledge 
the need for a more rational use of energy. 
The focus is very much on the development 
of new technologies to improve efficiency in 
buildings, transportation and industry; also, 
the exploitation of sustainable and renewable 
energy sources such as geothermal, solar 
and wind power and bio energy should be 
strengthened.
District heating and cooling systems offer great 
potential for a more rational use of energy 
and a much greater use of sustainable energy 
sources. This guide is meant to introduce and 
describe the characteristics of contemporary 
district energy systems, their background 
and the great potential of this technology for 
modern towns and cities.
In this guide we have described some of the 
most important issues of district heating and 
cooling systems. These are mainly related to 
rational use of energy, energy conservation 
and environmental improvements. The 
preconditions of any district energy plant 
depend very much on local conditions. These 
comprise issues like climate, culture, city 
structure, building design and admission to 
energy resources. In other words, two district 
energy systems will never be identical. 
Therefore, this guide describes a number of 
factors and aspects to take into consideration in 
connection with planning, design, construction 
and operation of new systems and is mainly 
meant for inspiration in the seek for better 
energy solutions in the future.
District heating transmission pipes


--- page 4 ---
DEFINITION OF DISTRICT ENERGY
7
6
DEFINITION OF
DISTRICT ENERGY
District Energy (DE) is a term covering both dis-
trict heating and district cooling systems. The 
two types of services – or utilities – are similar 
infrastructures able to provide heating or cool-
ing to a number of buildings. In both cases, 
the infrastructure consists of a double pipe 
network, connecting the energy station with 
each costumer connected to the system. Such 
systems may cover one or more districts with a 
high density of buildings in a city. To an increas-
ing extent, new city districts or new towns are 
supplied entirely with DE, and in many cases 
existing towns or cities use DE to a very high 
extent (more than 90%).
District Heating (DH)
In DH systems, hot water is pumped through 
the flow pipe line to the consumers, passes 
through the consumers’ heating systems where 
the water releases its energy to the buildings 
and flows back to the station for reheating. In 
contemporary systems, typical flow and return 
temperatures may be around 75 °C and 35 °C, 
respectively. Low temperature systems, how-
ever, are gaining ground these years. In such 
systems, flow and return temperatures may be 
as low as 60/30 °C or even 55/25 °C. Some older 
DH systems operate on steam instead of water.
District Cooling (DC)
In DC systems, the outgoing water is cooled 
to below ambient temperature and is then 
forwarded to the consumer where the excess 
heat from the building’ air conditioning plant is 
transferred to the DC water. The heated water is 
returned to the plant for re-cooling in different 
types of chillers. The excess heat then has to 
be rejeceted to the surroundings or recycled 
for use in a district heating system. The flow 
temperatures of contemporary DC systems may 
be about 10 °C and the return temperatures 
about 20 °C. Older systems were often designed 
for 4/12 °C.
Connection between 
heating and cooling
The maximum heating and cooling loads of a 
building in the winter and summer, respectively, 
are often about the same level. Depending on 
the location, the duration of the period for heat-
ing and cooling is seldom the same. In northern 
Europe, for example, the heating season is 
longer than the cooling season. However, with 
an increasing number of electrical appliances 
such as computers and servers in modern office 
buildings, there is an increasing need for cooling 
in office buildings throughout the year; also, DH 
normally runs throughout the summer in order 
to cover the demand for hot sanitary water.
Construction of a large district heating mainline through the 
centre of a city.  


--- page 5 ---
A BRIEF HISTORY OF
DISTRICT ENERGY
District Heating
Apart from some known examples in the 
Roman Empire where water from hot springs 
was channelled under the floors of buildings 
in order to heat rooms, district heating on an 
industrial scale was first built in the USA by the 
end of the 19th century. 
1. generation
These first generation systems were built 
for using steam; after heating the buildings, 
the condensate was transferred to the sewer 
systems. However, later systems were built with 
return lines for the condensate which reduced 
the loss of water and of energy, as the system 
became a loop system with reheating of the 
condensate. 
2. generation
At the beginning of the 20th century, second 
generation systems based on high temperature 
water (over 120 °C) appeared. Many large cities 
in Europe took up the idea of DH in combina-
tion with electrification where waste heat 
from turbines or engines in local power plants 
could be used for heating purposes. Typically, 
the centres of cities with a large number of 
public buildings were supplied, and over time 
these systems also grew to include multi-storey 
housing areas. As for the first generation plants, 
connections to consumer plants took place via 
heat exchangers due to the high temperatures 
and high pressures of these plants. DH plants of 
this type were built in large numbers in western 
and central Europe, Russia and Asia.
3. generation
Third generation systems are characterised by 
the use of hot water at temperatures below 
120 °C. A very large number of such plants 
were built in Denmark in the second half of the 
20th century. In fact, a large share of all Danish 
homes and a large number of institutional, 
industrial and business buildings are heated 
this way. The great majority of these plants are 
connected to consumer installations without 
heat exchangers, which means that the DH 
water from the generation plants circulates 
all the way through the pipe network into the 
radiators and other installations of each house 
and back. However, hot water tanks or heat 
exchangers for hot sanitary water supply are 
installed in the houses. 
Typically, these plants were operated at flow 
temperatures around 80 °C, and it appeared 
possible to achieve return temperatures in such 
plants of around 40 °C. However, in very hilly 
cities with large elevations or in tall buildings, 
high static pressures could prevail. In such 
cases, it was necessary to use heat exchangers 
to separate the internal piping in the house 
from the distribution network. Today, the sys-
tems are typically operated at lower tempera-
tures for most of the year. 
The use of fairly low DH temperatures made 
it possible to extract steam from turbines 
in combined heat and power plants at low 
pressures which contributed to a high total 
efficiency as relatively more electric power could 
be generated compared to plants built for high 
temperature DH systems. With low tempera-
tures, greater utilisation of industrial waste 
heat, geothermal energy and for instance solar 
energy was also possible. 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF DISTRICT ENERGY
9
8
District heating plays a substantial role in Denmark. Some 450 
plants – large and small – supply DH to 1,6 million homes. This 
corresponds to about 64% of all homes and in addition a large 
number of institutions and businesses are supplied.


--- page 6 ---
CONSUMER INSTALLATION
11
10
In order to further improve the system effi-
ciency of DH systems, the fourth generation is 
now appearing. Lower energy needs in better 
insulated houses, improved technologies in 
piping systems, compact heat exhangers or 
flat stations for the preparation of hot sanitary 
water, control equipment and optimisation 
software etc. is the background for this devel-
opment which is happening smoothly. It has 
already been shown in a number of applications 
how it is possible to further reduce and control 
flow temperatures according to day-to-day and 
hour-to-hour needs; accordingly, lower return 
temperatures are also achieved. 
A number of targeted demonstration systems 
have been introduced, using new types of twin 
pipes with very small dimensions in order to 
reduce heat loss, and a wide range of related ini-
tiatives such as the use of smart equipment for 
the preparation of hot sanitary water are seen 
these years. A large-scale international R&D 
project managed in Denmark called “Fourth 
Generation District Heating” (www.4dh.dk) has 
been launched and will focus on all aspects of 
smart district heating in the near future.
District Cooling
DC systems have been known since the middle 
of the last century. The concept is similar to DH 
apart from the fact that the purpose is to cool 
buildings; that is, to remove heat arising from 
solar radiation, office equipment, lightning and 
human activity etc. in the buildings. Cooling 
load peaks during the summer, but even during 
winter the need for cooling is large. 
One of the first known examples of a district 
cooling plant was in Hartford, Connecticut and 
was based on cold river water taken in and used 
for circulation in a city centre plant. Since then, 
a very large number of much more advanced 
and larger systems have been developed and 
are in operation throughout America, Europe 
and the Middle and Far East. The production 
plants for cooling are fundamentally very differ-
ent from heating plants, and generally speaking 
they are much more complex in nature. Cooling 
plants may be electrically driven compressor 
plants and/or heat driven absorption plants, 
and this kind of equipment has been subject to 
considerable development over the past thirty 
years. Also, free cooling in the shape of sea or 
lake water is used in such plants in combination 
with traditional chillers.
DC plants are based on the same ideas and ben-
efits as for DH plants: economy of scale, a more 
rational use of energy, and a lower demand for 
user maintenance, as professional staff takes 
care of the centralised plant. In addition, when 
DC and DH are operated together, the interac-
tion between the generation of power, heat and 
cooling can be beneficial for all services with 
regard to economy and energy conservation. 
4. generation
PE protecion casing
Diffusion barrier
PE foam isulation
Leak detection wires
Media pipes in 
steel, copper or PEX
Twin pipe


--- page 7 ---
CONSUMER INSTALLATION
13
12
CONSUMER
INSTALLATIONS
Direct systems
The connection between a DH distribution net-
work and the heating installations in buildings 
can be either direct or indirect. 
In direct systems, the DH water is led directly 
into the internal piping system of the house 
and circulates through the radiators. It also 
provides the heat exchanger or the hot water 
tank with hot sanitary water. In direct systems, 
the maximum pressure of the system should be 
kept low - normally 6 bar. A direct connection 
is a very simple and low cost way to connect to 
a consumer installation. The drawback is that 
the consumer will have no means of adjusting 
the incoming temperature set by the DH plant. 
Instead, the temperature set by the plant needs 
to be within a range that is suitable for the con-
sumers to use. The advantage of a direct system 
is the possibility for operation with very low 
flow and return temperatures, as the tempera-
ture drop over a heat exchanger can be avoided. 
On the other hand, a maximum pressure of 6 
bar is only possible in districts with moderate 
hills in order not to get a too high static pres-
sure in the system. For the same reason, the 
height of buildings should also be moderate.
Indirect systems
In indirect systems, a heat exchanger will 
separate the DH system water from the central 
heating water circulating inside the house to be 
heated. In this case, the pressure levels in the 
DH system and in the house internal system do 
not need to be the same. .
Typically, an indirect system will need DH flow 
temperatures about 10 °C higher than direct 
systems, and in addition, circulation pumps 
will be needed in each building. Also the return 
temperature will be about 10 °C higher.
A heat exchanger is used in both District 
Heating and District Cooling applications. The 
advantage is that the heat exchanger enables 
hydraulic separation between the second-
ary side and the primary side. Because of this 
hydraulic separation there will be no impact on 
the primary side if a pipe bursts on the second-
ary side. At the same time, the advantage for 
Direct connection between the district heating network and consumer installations
Indirect connection between the district heating network and consumer installations. 
District 
heating
network
District 
heating
network


--- page 8 ---
CONSUMER INSTALLATION
15
14
the consumer is that only a limited amount of 
water will leak.
The advantages of having a heat exchanger are 
not limited to the hydraulic separation. 
In most cases, the temperature provided by the 
district energy plant can be either reduced (for 
heating applications) or increased (for cooling 
applications). By doing this, thermal losses 
will be reduced at the consumer side. Experi-
ence shows that savings of up to 20% can be 
achieved in a heating application by adding this 
type of temperature adjustment.
The heat exchanger will allow the consumer to 
adjust the flow temperature on the secondary 
side to what is actually needed. This is typically 
done by automatically adjusting the control 
valve on the primary side. The set point for this 
valve is given by a climate control unit, often 
called a weather compensation unit in heating 
applications. In this way, the flow temperature 
is adjusted according to the outdoor tempera-
ture. 
Temperature levels and flow rates in a district 
heating system has to be seen in the same 
context: A high flow temperature enable a low 
return temperature and therefore a relatively 
small flow rate and low pumping costs. On the 
other hand, low flow and return temperatures 
means that the heat loss from the network is 
low. The optimised balance therefor should 
comprise the cost of electricity and the cost of 
heat at the location of the system. This complex 
optimisation is what is incorporated in the con-
temporary optimisation programs presented in 
the chapter Network analyses and temperature 
optimisation. 
 
Example of a plate heat exchanger (PHE) from the 
company Danfoss. 
Brazed heat exchangers: 
Light weight, small dimensions, competitive price. 
Cleaning only by flushing, no repair possible, max capac-
ity ~ 2 MW 
 
Gasketed heat exchangers:
Heavy construction, can be opened for cleaning and 
repair.
Max capacity 30-50 MW
Rear cover plate
Channel plate / primary side
Channel plate / secondary side
Connection
Cover plate
Basic principles of a plate heat exchanger
-	 The heat exchangers are made of form-pressed stainless steel plates between which the flow channels are created.
-	 The heavy turbulence and counter flow principle enables an efficient heat transfer 
-	 The principal basic BPHE (brazed plate heat exchanger) design relies onis constructed using a series of thin corrugated 
Stainless 	
	
	
Steel plates that are brazed together with Copper 
-	 Every second plate is turned 180°to create separate flow paths for liquid


--- page 9 ---
HOT WATER PRODUCTION
17
16
Mixing loop connection
A Mixing loop connection enables the con-
sumer to adjust the flow temperature according 
to the actual need by adjusting the control valve 
on the primary side. When the valve is partially 
closed, a certain amount of water is re-circu-
lated into the flow pipe, so the flow tempera-
ture on the secondary side will be a mixture 
of the primary flow pipe temperature and the 
secondary return pipe temperature.
The reason for adjusting the flow temperature 
is to adapt to the different load needs during 
the day, based on e.g. the load of the building 
in terms of persons, computers, lighting etc. 
The load also fluctuates over the year based on 
actual local weather conditions. 
Mixing loop connection enabling the user to adjust flow temperature to actual need. 
HOT WATER 
PRODUCTION
Hot sanitary water can be provided in several 
ways. The traditional solution is using a hot 
water tank with an internal spiral is shown 
below.
Hot water tank
Source: Viessmann
Hot water outlet
Cold water inlet
District heating return 
District heating flow
Hot water circulation
A typical load duration curve for district heating.
Hours per year
Load %
Peak load
Intermediate load
2000
4000
6000
8000
Basic load
0


--- page 10 ---
HOT WATER PRODUCTION
19
18
In recent years, it has become common to use 
heat exchangers due to the limited space need 
of these units. Another advantage, and not the 
least, is the high efficiency which enables hot 
water production with a relatively low primary 
temperature. An example of a relatively simple 
installation is shown below.
In situations where the peak load for hot water 
exceeds the capacity from the district heating 
network, one solution can be to install a heat 
exchanger in combination with a hot water 
tank, a so called charging circuit. 
Using this solution, the “charging” period can 
be extended and sufficient amounts of hot 
water can be held “in stock”, capable of suf-
ficient supply at peak loads. Another benefit is 
this system’s ability to deliver the return water 
to the district heating network at a relatively 
low temperature. 
For all types of hot water production, special 
precautions should be made regarding sanitary 
conditions to avoid for example legionella. This 
topic will not be dealt with in this leaflet, but is 
touched upon in the Disinfection Guide. 
When a plate heat exchanger is part of the hot 
water system, lime scaling and how to avoid 
this should also be addressed, as it can have 
A hot water charging system with a storage tank
Plate heat exchanger installation for domestic 
hot water production.
Domestic hot water
District Heating return
District heating flow
Domestic cold water inlet
Hot water circulation
a huge negative performance impact to the 
system. Problems regarding lime scaling vary 
quite a lot depending on the ground water 
source. Local authorities should always be con-
sulted prior to any decisions regarding which 
type of system will be optimal.
Domestic cold 
water
District heating flow
District heating return
Exchanger unit
Hot water 
tank
Cold water
Hot water 
circulation
Dometic 
hot water


--- page 11 ---
DISTRIBUTION NET
21
20
HEAT TRANSMISSION 
NETWORK
Depending on the structure and size of cities, 
combinations of direct and indirect systems 
may also be useful. In large DH systems covering 
an entire region, an overall heat transmission 
system may connect a number of large scale 
substations, each of which serves local smaller 
DH systems where consumer connections are 
made directly. This system would still allow for 
low temperature operation in each district and 
may benefit from contributions from local heat 
sources such as solar collectors or surplus heat 
from businesses. 
The overall system will actually be able to  
transmit large amounts of heat over long 
distances in much the same way that power 
transmission systems work. 
Large consumers 
While small buildings like one family houses 
normally have their own DH connections, blocks 
of flats or office buildings with a large number 
of tenants or other types of users like businesses 
will normally have one branch connection from 
the DH system. 
Until now, such buildings have typically had 
one common system for the preparation of 
hot sanitary water based on a centralised hot 
water tank typically placed in the basement of 
the building. However, in order to reduce pipe 
lengths and improve the quality of the hot      
water supply, new hot water systems based 
on having one heat exchanger for hot water in 
each flat are now appearing in such buildings. 
This approach will also make it easier to allow 
for measurement of heat consumption in each 
lease. 
DISTRICT COOLING
DC customers are normally large buildings 
hosting businesses, hotels, institutions etc. 
Typically, a DC plant is designed according to local 
conditions, and the design often puts certain 
restraints on the way consumer installations 
should be designed and operated in order to 
optimise the entire system. Therefore it is not 
possible in this guide to set up general rules for 
the design of such consumer systems.
 As a general rule, however, it can be stated 
that a system will normally encourage the use 
of cheap and easily accessible cooling capacity 
such as free cooling and other low cost options, 
and the distribution system will therefore be 
run at relatively high temperatures. Modern 
air conditioning systems are designed for such 
conditions but it is important - to a much higher 
degree than for DH systems - that the demand 
side is optimised according to the lay out of the 
supply side.     
SETTLEMENT OF 
CONSUMPTION AND 
TARIFFS
As with any other utility like power or water 
supply, rules for metering and billing heating or 
cooling must be set up and be part of a contract 
with customers. Tariffs are often split into fixed 
and variable fees, and consumers may also 
have to pay a connection fee when they are 
connected to the system.
•	
The fixed fee reflects the fixed annual costs 	
	
of the distribution system and the 
	
production plants. This will mainly 	
	
District cooling plant servicing several commercial buildings.


--- page 12 ---
METERING
23
22
	
be capital and staff costs for operation 	
	
and maintenance. 
•	
The variable fee reflects the procurement of 	
	
energy which may be fuel, electricity for 	
	
pump operation or purchase of surplus 	
	
energy from industry or other sources. 
•	
The connection fee reflects a given 	
	
	
consumer’s share of the capacity of the 	
	
system and will often be calculated based 	
	
on e.g. the size of the building to be 	 	
	
supplied. 
Often, further circumstances or rules regulate 
the economic relations between the customers 
and the DE supplier. An example could be 
encouraging the customers to return the DH 
water at the lowest possible temperature, 
which will help maximise the capacity of 
the distribution system and minimise the 
production costs. In order to achieve this, it is 
possible to put an incentive on very low return 
temperatures from each consumer or even put 
a penalty on too high return temperatures.  
How the fees and regulations between the 
customers and the DE company are set up and 
governed depends on the DE company and on 
local or national legislation or even traditions. 
In some countries, DE services are offered 
and operated by competitive free enterprises 
while in other countries, they are more or less 
regulated by the authorities.    
  
80
75
70
65
60
55
20
10
0
-10
-20
Flow 
temp. °C 
Outdoor
temp. °C 
Ex.  outdoor t -20 °C  = 75 °C  ﬂow t
 
outdoor t   10 °C = 61 °C  ﬂow t
Function of the climate control: 
By adding water to the secondary side the mixing loop is adjusting the flow temperature based on outdoor temperature.
Smart meters
Contemporary energy meters for installation at 
each individual customer are able to measure 
both flow rates and forward and return 
temperatures and on that basis calculate the 
amount of energy actually consumed. Data are 
registered and calculated at given intervals in 
such meters, and these data can be collected 
through wired or wireless connections to the DE 
company for further processing and billing.  
Given the data about temperatures and flows at 
the edge of any building connection , it is now 
possible together with similar data from the 
central SCADA system to get a total picture at 
any time of the energy production, distribution 
and consumption in the complete system..
Outdoor temperature sensor
Climate
Controle


--- page 13 ---
LOAD PROFILES
Load in %
Time
Calculation proﬁle
Load proﬁle
420       1050                        2450                                             3080
25
50
75
100
7000
25
24
-25
Heating demand
Cooling demand
Outdoor temperature °c
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
8760
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
LOAD PROFILES 
GLOBALLY
The highest average temperatures occur in 
the tropical and subtropical zones, leaving this 
part of the world in need of more cooling than 
heating. The greater the distance from the 
equator (and thereby the closer the proximity 
to the north and south poles), the colder the 
climate gets, thereby increasing the need for 
heating. 
Another benefit of adjusting the flow tem-
perature is the ability to increase the Δt in the 
system. 
A minor increase in Δt gives a significant 
reduction in required flow and thereby power 
consumption of the pump system.
Φ	 = Energy flow
Δt	 = Temperature difference
Q	 = Volume flow
Φ
= Q
Δt
Distribution
Consumer
Δt
Flow
Δt
Flow
Load
°C
m3/h
°C
m3/h
1
7,5
150
6
187
2
7,5
90
6
113
3
7,5
60
6
75
4
7,5
120
6
150
5
7,5
120
6
225
Total
600
750
A 1,5 degree increase in Δt gives a 20% decrease in flow
World map with climate zones
Load profiles based on different climate zones.
Load profile and calculation profile
Temperate zone
Polar zone
Subtropical zone
Tropical zone


--- page 14 ---
THEORY
27
26
DESIGN AND
OPERATION OF 
THE NETWORK
A double pipe distribution 
system
After generation of either heat or cooling, 
the water is distributed to the consumer via 
a network of insulated pipes. District energy 
systems consist of flow and return lines. Usually 
the pipes are installed underground but there 
are also systems with overground pipes. Due 
to differences in Δt, the flows and thereby pipe 
sizes vary greatly. The return temprature should 
always be as low as possible in order to obtain 
the largest possible Δt, and thereby the lowest 
possible waterflow in the pipes.
In district cooling systems, the flow tempera-
ture is often set between 4 and 10 °C, and the 
return temperature around 10-20 °C, depending 
on local conditions. The system temperature 
in district heating is more varied and can be 
anything from a flow temperature of 55 °C in 
the most recent low temperature systems to 
a flow temperature of 80-90 °C or even higher. 
In order to achieve high energy efficiency in 
heat generation plants, the return temperature 
should be as low as possible, which means that 
the Δt should be as high as possible. 
In general, there is a trend towards high tem-
perature cooling and low temperature heating. 
The reason for this is the aim of delivering heat 
or cooling as cost-effectively as possible, with 
the lowest possible thermal loss in the distribu-
tion system. Due to the affinity laws, the Δt will 
have a huge impact on the pumping cost.
The energy savings achieved by reducing the 
speed of a centrifugal pump are quite consider-
able. As this example shows, reducing the flow 
by 50% will result in up to a 88% reduction of 
the original power consumption. 
Especially in district cooling systems, where 
the Δt is much lower than in a district heating 
system, it is extremely important to maintain 
Δt at an acceptable level. A pressure profile 
is shown below to illustrate the difference in 
required differential pressure from the main 
pump installation, depending on different Δt 
levels. 
By changing the speed of the pump, the performance can be 
changed and energy can be saved. As an example, the speed is 
reduced to 50 %, the differential pressure (H) drops to 25 % and 
the power consumption drops from 100 % to 12,5 %.
The law of aﬃnity shows the link between:
- RPM
- Flow
- Head
- Power
Q2 
n2 
Q1    
n2
=
H2 
n2 
H1    
n2
=
2
P2 
n2 
P1    
n2
=
3
P
Q  [%]
50
100
100
12.5
[%]
[%]
H
100
RPM
Fixed system
characteristics
100%
50%
FLOW > RPM
HEAD > RPM
POWER > RPM
50
100
25
District heating pipes ready for installation. 


--- page 15 ---
THEORY
29
28
The design pressure loss in the distribution net 
has a huge impact on the total pump system’s 
energy consumption. The recommended level 
of pressure loss per metre typically is approxi-
mately 100 Pa/metre*. However, ideally the 
appropriate pipe size should be determined 
from an economic study of the life-cycle cost for 
construction and operation.** When establish-
ing the design flow for thermal distribution 
systems, the diversity of consumer demands 
should be considered, as the maximum demand 
of various consumers does not occur at the 
same time. 
The heat supply and main piping may therefore 
be sized for a maximum load that is somewhat 
less than the sum of the maximum demands of 
all individual consumers. Diversity factors can 
be set as low as 0,65 but should be calculated 
with caution, as the size and number of loads 
affects the values. The importance of achieving 
a high Δt is illustrated in the chart below. The 
“Hydraulic power P4 %” mentioned is a theo-
retically calculated value showing the relation 
between Δt and the needed power needed for 
pump operation. The value does not take into 
account the efficiency of the pump. The connec-
tion between Δt and the necessary power for 
pump operation. 
The chart shows the effect of increasing the 
Δt by just 1 °C in a cooling system and 3 °C in 
a heating system. Here it is clear that we can 
reduce the hydraulic power demand by 27%. 
That is why it is important to focus on Δt in all 
operation conditions.
The mentioned hydraulic power P4 is a theoreti-
cally calculated value that does not take pump 
efficiency into account. The correlation between 
Δt and the power needed for pump operation is 
given by the affinity laws.
The reason why this has such a huge impact 
is the fact that flow is proportional to power 
in third proportion . Even a minor increase in 
Δt will therefore decrease the need for power 
to the pump quite substantially, especially 
in district cooling systems as the design Δt is 
relatively low.
The higher the Δt, the lower the need for differential pres-
sure in the system. Increasing the Δt by only 2,7 °C reduces 
the need for differential pressure by a factor of 2,2.
40
20
73
100
120
140
160
80
100
117
133
150
167
∆%
5
6
7
8
9
10
∆t
17
20
23
27
30
33
∆t
Cooling
Heating
Hydraulic power P4 %
Design ∆t
New ∆t
The link between Δt and P4 in a system
* Bøhm 1988 
** 2012 Ashrae Handbook
20
10
0
30
40
50
60
70
80
Plant supply loss
5.6 °C delta T
6.7 °C delta T
8.3 °C delta T
Supply piping loss
Return 
piping loss
Diﬀerential pressure 
across critical customer
Plant 
return loss
Pressure head mWc
Distance from the source
}
}
}


--- page 16 ---
SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
31
30
Installation of underground 
pipes
As shown on these pictures, pipes for district 
heating are normally pre-insulated, giving a 
relatively low amount of thermal loss.
Pipes for district cooling in some cases are 
not insulated, as the temperature difference 
between the chilled water inside the pipes 
and the surrounding soil is relatively low. This, 
of course, depends very much on the actual 
location. In the Middle East, for example, 
with high average outdoor temperatures, the 
situation can be different, requiring insulation. 
However, even if the pipes are not insulated, 
they must always be coated on the outside in 
order to protect against corrosion. 
SCADA, Supervisory Control 
and Data Acquisition
In order to secure optimum performance in a 
district energy system, it is vital that facility 
management has the ability to monitor and 
adjust different parameters in the system.  This 
demand is covered by comprehensive SCADA 
systems to be used by the operational staff. As 
examples, these are the delivered differential 
pressure to consumers and the actual flow 
temperature. For optimum plant efficiency, 
the return temperature from the consumers 
is a vital part to monitor. In some district 
cooling systems, the plant manager may shut 
consumers off if the agreed return temperature 
is not achieved. 
NETWORK ANALYSIS 
AND TEMPERATURE 
OPTIMISATION
Most DH networks undergo various alterations 
during their lifetime. Many of the current DH 
networks have grown naturally, as cities have 
expanded. This means that the original net-
works have often changed with regard to both 
size and load. The extension of the DH systems 
has often created more complex systems that 
are difficult to operate without the help of 
computers. Although many DH networks were 
originally calculated using computer models, 
the computer models of today have many new 
features to offer due to the on-going develop-
ment in computer science. 
Besides the static computer models that 
have been around since the late 1980es, new 
dynamic models have started to surface from 
approximately 2008. These models are con-
nected to other systems like SCADA, weather 
prognosis and remote metering systems. This 
combination allows for more complex automa-
tion, for example of flow temperature.  An 
example of such a system is the TERMIS district 
energy software.
An example of the modules in the TERMIS 
system is the temperature optimization module 
which automatically minimizes heat loss in 
district heating networks, typically reducing 
it by 10%. This leads to significant savings of 
up to 2% of the heat cost while reducing CO2 
emissions.
Underground pipes in a city center
New pipes are ready for installation in industrial area.


--- page 17 ---
SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
33
32
The inlet temperature is adjusted to be as low 
as possible, taking into account the amount 
of heat to be supplied to the consumers in the 
network. The temperature optimization module 
takes into account the accumulated energy in 
the network, and the changes that will occur 
as a result of weather forecasts of outdoor 
temperature and wind conditions.
In the future, even greater integration can be 
expected between the various computer sys-
tems that are used in modern DH networks. The 
focus will continue to be on optimising heat 
losses, but pump and production optimisation 
will also take place. Special focus will be on the 
return temperature where the potential savings 
are the biggest but also the most difficult to 
obtain.
As a final remark, it can be concluded that 
computerised optimisation of DH networks is 
only in its start-up phase. The steady improve-
ment of computer power and simulations by 
means of software like TERMIS will continue in 
the future. Especially as an aid to operators, it 
is and will continue to be very valuable, giving 
the operators valuable information in the daily 
operation and supporting them in the often 
complex decisions to be taken when optimisa-
tion of the entire DH system is the primary goal.
GENERATION OF 
HEATING AND 
COOLING
Thermal needs 
The demand for heating and/or cooling first of 
all depends on local climate conditions and spe-
cific needs. In temperate climate zones, there 
will normally be a need for both heating and 
cooling. Assuming that the peak needs for the 
two services are equal – which is often the case 
– the load duration curves shown below can 
be set up.  A duration curve indicates the load 
variation over a full year (in northern or central 
Europe in this case). It can be seen that the 
duration is about three times as long for heat-
ing as for cooling. Further south, the relation 
between the two needs will shift: less hours for 
heating and more hours for cooling.
Traditional and new approach showing how the flow tem-
perature is controlled in order to fit the demand.  The result 
is a lower supply temperature
78
76
74
72
64
62
60
58
Traditional Approach
Supply temperature
(°C)
Consumer temperature
(°C)
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
New Approach
Supply temperature
Consumer temperature
Screen dump from TERMIS
Annual load duration curves for district heating 
and cooling (northern hemisphere).
District
Heating
District 
Cooling


--- page 18 ---
35
34
ENERGY 
CONSERVATION AND 
IMPACT ON CLIMATE 
AND ENVIRONMENT
One of the main advantages of DE is the fact 
that DE plants offer a huge potential for reduc-
ing the direct use of fossil fuels as compared 
to individual systems. This is important to the 
economy and the environment; high usage of 
fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas is one of 
the major threats to the climate as the released 
CO2 will increase the greenhouse effect around 
the globe.
Typical alternative heat sources, which are 
increasingly being used in DH plants, include 
industrial surplus heat, heat from the incinera-
tion of municipal waste, biogas, biofuels like 
straw from farming or wood from foresting 
(in the shape of chips or pellets), geothermal 
energy, solar energy and to some extent wind 
power. 
In district cooling, some of the same fuels may 
be used for the operation of absorption cooling 
plants, and cold sea water or lake water is often 
used for free cooling. The backbone of most DE 
plants is the co-generation of power, heat and 
cooling. There is a wide range of possibilities 
for combining the generation of these services 
such as steam turbines, which may be operated 
on biomass or municipal waste. Another option 
is gas turbines or gas engines operated on for 
instance biogas. For many years, such plants 
were – and to some extent still are – operated 
on coal, oil or gas. It is a fact, however, that an 
increasing number of plants are now designed 
Renevable 
energy resources
Distributed 
energy resources
Co-generation
Surplus heat
Centralised fuel production,
power and storage
Smart energy 
system control
H2 vehicle
EV
NEXT GENERATION OF DE-SYSTEMS
A sustainable energy system is a smarter, more unified and integrated energy system


--- page 19 ---
37
36
for or retrofitted to use more renewable energy. 
This is another key advantage of DE systems, 
as it is relatively easy to convert one large plant 
from fossil fuels to more environmentally 
friendly alternatives as compared to chang-
ing thousands of heating boilers or electrically 
operated split cooling plants in a large city. 
Additionally, the overall efficiency of large 
“district systems” is normally higher due to 
economics of scale and due to the fact that the 
output needed from one large system is lower 
than the sum of the outputs of a large number 
of individual plants. This means that all DE 
consumers will benefit from a low simultane-
ous factor among consumers and a high plant 
utilisation factor in the large system. It should 
also be mentioned that unlike individual instal-
lations, DE systems will be operated and main-
tained by professional staff constantly looking 
for possibilities for optimisation.
COMBINED HEAT 
AND POWER 
GENERATION
Combined generation of heat and power (CHP 
plants) offers a vast potential for the rational 
use of energy in towns and cities via existing or 
new DH networks. Through combined genera-
tion, a much higher total efficiency of the fuel 
used can be achieved. 
A conventional power plant typically has an 
overall efficiency of about up to 45%, while 50% 
of the energy is lost through cooling water and/
or a cooling tower and 5% is lost through the 
chimney. By utilising the cooling water from the 
NEXT GENERATION OF DE-SYSTEMS
Principle sketch of a combined heat and power plant, CHP
5% Fluegas
Turbine
Generator
Boiler
Fuel
Electric power
Waste water
 5% Fluegas
Turbine
Generator
Boiler
Fuel
Electric Power
District Heating
Principle sketch of a conventional power plant


--- page 20 ---
EFFICIENCY OF SCALE
39
38
condenser at a (higher) temperature suitable 
for a DH system, the efficiency of the power 
generation may be reduced to around 35%; 
however, the heat content of the cooling water 
may now be used for heating purposes. In this 
way, the maximum total efficiency of the CHP 
plant may be as high as 95% (electricity 35%, 
heat 60%).
Obviously, this is simplified examples of 
power plants, and also the figures shown are 
approximate values to indicate the potential 
for utilisation of heat from power plants. By 
planning a conversion of an existing power 
plant into a CHP plant or planning a new plant, 
the lower power output from a CHP plant – in 
this case 35 % vs. 45 % of fuel input - should of 
course be addressed. Even though additional 
electrical power may have to be provided from 
another plant, CHP still results in much lower 
total fuel consumption, as the heat from the 
CHP-plant will replace the use of many small, 
conventional and inefficient boilers.  
Traditional and individual “small scale” heating 
systems are typically based on fossil fuels such 
as coal, oil, gas or even electric heating and 
normally operate at a fairly low efficiency. A 
DH system, on the other hand, is able to utilise 
the heat generated in connection with power 
generation. In this way, the cooling water from 
conventional power generation, which would 
otherwise and inevitably have been lost to the 
environment, may be exploited. This concept 
entails large reductions of the city’s fuel con-
sumption and lower production costs. Theese 
are benefits that may be shared by power and 
DH customers. To further reduce the consump-
tion of fossil fuels, CHP plants may be built or 
retrofitted to use biomass or municipal waste.
In recent decades, there have been several 
55% of energy wasted as heat 
to the environment
5% of energy wasted as heat 
to the environment
Stardard power plant
Combined heat/power plant 
- District energy plant
Fuel input 
= 100%
Fuel input 
= 100%
45% energy output 
as electricity
35% energy output 
as electricity
60% energy produced for 
heating or cooling
examples of power plants that were retrofit-
ted into CHP plants being able to supply heat 
to nearby cities that already had a DH system 
based on heat-only boilers. In other cases, 
new CHP plants were built, and existing or 
completely new DH systems were built and 
extended to cover large parts of the cities. In 
some cases, even neighbouring cities were con-
nected by means of heat transmission lines in 
order to benefit from the economy of scale. 
Many CHP plants are designed as such from the 
beginning. However, experience also shows that 
existing condensing power plants can be retro-
fitted in order to produce both heat and power. 
This can be done for example by extracting 
steam after the intermediate pressure turbine 
to be used for heating DH water. 


--- page 21 ---
CASE STORY
41
40
Other available heat 
sources 
A DH system is able to utilise any kind of local 
waste heat which may be available in the city 
or its surroundings. This could be surplus heat 
in the shape of hot flue gases from cement fur-
naces, cooling water from a refinery or surplus 
heat from any industrial process released to the 
air through condensers or cooling towers. 
Obviously there must be accordance between 
the temperature needed in the DH system and 
the surplus heat to be exploited. This match 
is not always easy to achieve, but very often 
solutions may be found through cooperation 
between the provider and the DH company 
interested in the surplus heat. One solution 
may be that the heat provider is able to provide 
stepwise heating through a number of heat 
exchangers at different temperature levels of 
the industrial plant; in other cases, a heat pump 
to raise the temperature may be a feasible 
solution. Also, the DH company may be able to 
adjust its plant so that the contribution from 
the industry is used at least for preheating the 
DH water.
 
CASE: A REGIONAL MULTI-CITY DH SCHEME 
In the middle of Denmark, a multi-city district heating system serves 80.000 homes in the cities of 
Vejle, Fredericia, Middelfart and Kolding where the consumers benefit from large amounts of surplus 
heat generated in the area. For many years, eight local district heating companies were in operation 
before the regional heat transmission company TVIS was founded; now, each of these companies are 
connected to the regional heat transmission system via 25 large substations. 
The heat transmission system with a total length of 140 km was built and is operated by TVIS which 
was founded by the four municipalities in 1982. Altogether 55.000 consumers including one family 
and multi-storey houses, public buildings, office buildings and businesses are connected to the 
system. 
The main suppliers of heat are the Shell Refinery in Fredericia, the Skærbæk Power Station – a large-
scale CHP plant at Kolding fjord – and TAS, which is a waste-to-energy plant located in Kolding which 
treats municipal waste from all the municipalities.
Efficient use of energy
The fact that all DH companies in the area are interconnected through one system enables efficient 
use of the surplus heat which would otherwise have gone to waste. Local operation of directly 
fired oil or gas boilers in the former district heating stations has ceased, thus almost eliminating 
the direct consumption of fossil fuels for district heating. This is economical for the DH customers 
and improves the environment for everyone living in the region. Obviously, this is beneficial for our 
climate as it greatly reduces emissions of greenhouse gases.
The lessons learned over the course of twenty five years of operation show that the suppliers of heat 
and the transmission system have been very reliable. Annually, about 55% of the heat is supplied 
from the CHP plant, 26% comes from the refinery, 11% comes from waste, and only 2% is provided by 
heat-only boilers for very short periods on very cold days. 
     26 %
Surplus heat 
from refinery
55%
 Combined heat 
and power
            11% 
Waste incineration
2%
Heat only boilers
Vejle
Middelfart
Kolding
Fredericia
The district heating system of TVIS. The red lines indicate the 
superior transmission system and its substations. 
The yellow lines are the networks owned by the local district 
heating systems connected to TVIS.
A break down of sources for the District Heating system


--- page 22 ---
43
42
Generation of cooling in 
combination with heat and 
power
In DC plants, cold water for distribution to 
customers needs to be generated, and like 
for DH plants, combined generation involving 
alternative or renewable energy sources and 
different types of chillers (compressors, absorp-
tion chillers and free cooling) is getting more 
and more common. 
When such systems are planned, local condi-
tions and present and future needs must 
always be taken into consideration. The 
components to take into consideration and 
involve would be local sources of free cooling 
and possible sources of waste heat or biomass 
for driving absorption chillers. Finally, mechani-
cally/electrically driven cooling compressors 
will normally also be involved, and they may be 
installed as tri-generation plants being able to 
produce both cooling, heating and electricity.
The most obvious source to utilise is free cool-
ing, and even if the source is limited in compari-
son with the needs, the use of sea or lake water 
may be an important share of the base load. 
ENERGY STORAGE
20
10
0
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Free cooling
Compressor
Absorption
%
20
10
0
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
%
Break down of annual cooling generation


--- page 23 ---
45
44
WATER TREATMENT
It is very important for the successful operation 
of DE systems that no corrosion occurs so that 
the entire system remains tight and in good 
shape for many years. Adequate water quality 
is a decisive factor in this connection. This is 
a comprehensive issue, and we will confine 
ourselves to mentioning that strict demands 
regarding the conductivity of the circulating 
water, its pH value, residual hardness, appear-
ance and oxygen and chlorine content must be 
respected according to experience.
THERMAL ENERGY 
STORAGE SYSTEMS
In order to lessen the interdependency between 
the generation and needs of heat, power and 
cooling, heat or cold storage facilities may be an 
option. Such facilities have been in use for many 
years, and storage may take place in tanks, pits 
or underground aquifers. Such storage systems 
will increase the flexibility of plant operation 
and may even reduce fuel costs.
The principle of a heat storage tank typically 
found at many CHP plants. The tank is filled 
with DH water and is sealed with nitrogen 
or steam on the surface in order to allow for 
expansion and prevent contact with the oxygen 
of the atmosphere. Close to the bottom and 
just below the surface, two circular diffusers 
will allow the incoming or outgoing water to 
flow slowly and smoothly in the radial direction 
of the tank so that a minimum of disturbances 
in the water occurs. This design will allow the 
Principle of heat storage tank
Steam
Hot water in / outlet
Cold water in / outlet
Hot water
Cold water
Boundary 
layer
ENERGY STORAGE


--- page 24 ---
47
46
water to build up stratification so that the hot 
water for the outgoing flow line will remain in 
the upper part, and the cooler water from the 
return line will rest at the bottom. 
During loading, hot flow water from the 
generation plant will enter the tank at the top 
while the same flow of cold return water is 
taken out from the bottom and led to the plant 
for reheating. Slowly, the boundary layer where 
the temperature gradient between hot and cold 
water is high will move downwards. During 
unloading, for example when the CHP plant 
is stopped overnight, the process is reversed: 
The hot water from the top is pumped out into 
the DH network while the cold return water is 
pumped into the bottom of the tank, whereby 
the boundary layer will move upwards until the 
tank is unloaded.  Such tanks may be installed 
in order to allow a CHP plant to run with full 
power output during peak loads in the morning 
or late in the afternoon. In other cases, it may 
be a matter of being able to shut down the 
plant during nights or weekends and still be 
able to provide heat.
An increasing number of small and mid-sized 
DH plants are installing medium sized solar 
collector fields in order to use this renewable 
heat source. The energy from the sun is mainly 
available during the summer where the heat 
demand is typically only about 25% of the 
winter peak load. In order to increase the cover-
age of solar energy, so-called pit heat storages 
have been developed and are now in operation. 
They increase the usage of solar heat to some 
50% of the annual heat demand. 
A pit storage is a large rectangular excavation 
in the ground. The excess material is placed as 
a wall around the pit, and the bottom and sides 
are sealed with a water tight foil. The pit is filled 
with water, and a floating and insulated lid is 
placed on the top. Also in this case, the water 
will stratify in a hot layer on top and a cold layer 
at the bottom. Similar concepts may be used for 
storage in DC systems. Also, snow or ice “har-
vested” during winter could be an additional 
source of free cooling. 
Underground aquifers are another option for 
storing warm or cold water from season to 
season. Obviously, such systems demand that 
underground aquifers are available close to a 
possible DH and/or DC plant. Such a system has 
been established by Grundfos and the Bjerring-
bro DH company in 2013. 
The Studstrup CHP-plant has a max electical output of 350 MW and a max. heat output of 455 MW.
The 33.000 m3 tank of the plant is seen to the far right.
ENERGY STORAGE


--- page 25 ---
49
48
CASE: Grundfos in close cooperation with the Bjerringbro district heating system
Grundfos in close cooperation with the Bjerringbro district heating system
In 2013, Grundfos and the Bjerringbro district heating company inaugurated a joint system to 
exploit heat for district heating from the compressors’ cooling production machinery at the 
factory. 
Operating compressors is very energy demanding and expensive, and a lot of surplus heat has 
to be cooled off to the air by means of cooling towers.
The new plant is based on three elements: exploitation of surplus heat from the cooling 
machines, indirect storage of heat in an underground aquifer, and use of a heat pump to raise 
the temperature of the stored energy for use in district heating.
During the summer, there is no need for heat from Grundfos, and therefore the entire con-
denser heat from the cooling compressors is sent through a pipeline to the storage where the 
heat is put “in stock” in the aquifer about 750 m away. In the autumn, when the DH system 
requires heat from the storage, about 80 % of the heat stored during the summer is still avail-
able. In order to raise the temperature to the level needed in the DH network, the Bjerringbro 
district heating company will raise the temperature by means of a heat pump. In the winter, the 
DH company gets the surplus heat from both the storage and directly from the compressors. 
Grundfos will save up to 90 % of the power that has until now been used in the cooling towers, 
and the DH company is able to reduce the gas consumption in its CHP plant. In total 4,7 mill. 
euro have been invested by the two partners who have split the costs 50/50. About 0,4 mill. euro 
will be saved in energy costs annually. This corresponds to a payback time of 12-13 years which is 
fine for a DH company, but often too long for an industrial company. However, at the same time 
3.700 tons of CO2 is saved, and seen in relation to Grundfos’ policy of energy conservation and 
sustainability, the result is fully acceptable.  
The Grundfos Energy Central established 2013 
CASE STORY


--- page 26 ---
DE IMPACT ON SOCIETY
51
50
THE DANISH 
EXAMPLE
Denmark has benefited from DH for almost a 
century, and its extension has grown steadily 
throughout this period. In 2010, approx. 64% 
of all homes in Denmark were heated in this 
way, and a large number of public and business 
buildings in the cities are also connected. 
In many danish cities, the coverage of DH is 
around 95%. During the past decade, a large 
district cooling system has also been installed 
in the central parts of Copenhagen.
While oil was the dominant fuel in DH systems 
35 years ago, the share of coal and gas grew 
for some years. However, the use of bio fuels, 
surplus heat and renewable energy grew stead-
ily during this period and now covers 52% of the 
energy input to the 400 DH schemes serving 
almost all towns and cities throughout the 
country. In the near future, we will see much 
more biomass being used, particularly at CHP 
plants and large boiler stations.
On the longer term, we will see more sustain-
able energy being integrated in district heating. 
The heat demand in buildings will gradually 
be reduced due to new ways of construction 
and increasing efforts in retrofitting existing 
buildings.
As a result of this change of energy sources, 
over the past ten years CO2  emissions from the 
Danish DH sector have been reduced to about 
60% of 1990 levels, and this is the major reason 
for the reduction of total Danish CO2 emissions 
to a level of about 85% compared to 1990.
District heating plays a substantial role in Denmark. 
Some 450 plants – large and small – supply DH to 1,6 
million homes. This corresponds to about 64% of all 
homes and in addition a large number of institutions 
and businesses are supplied. 
Total impact on the climate from the danish district heating sector
Source: Energistatistik 2012 and calculations by COWI A/S.
Index
120
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
130
140
150
160
170
60
70
40
50
80
90
100
110
Total DH production
Gross energy consumption
CO  emission from DH sector
Total CO  emission
²
²


--- page 27 ---
DE IMPACT ON SOCIETY
53
52
An important part of this status is the wide-
spread use of CHP plants, which  by nature 
utilise any fuel at a much higher total efficiency 
than is the case for separate power and heat 
generation. In Denmark, about 60% of all power 
generation now takes place in combination 
with DH, and 80% of all DH is derived from CHP 
plants.
Over the past 100 years, the dominant energy 
sources in district heating have changed from 
coal to lignite, oil, coal again, natural gas and 
now renewable sources. Similarly, a change 
from biomass, which will also become scarce, 
will occur in the years to come. Technologies for 
the utilisation of solar, wind and geothermal 
energy and other future sources of energy will 
be developed further. 
During the past 25 years, 1 billion people in the 
world have been lifted from poverty into the 
middle class, which has increased the need for 
energy. It is estimated, however, that over the 
next 25 years, another 3 billion people will leave 
poverty and join the growing middle class. This 
will be a tremendous challenge to the energy 
sources. An efficient use of fossil fuels will 
become mandatory, and preferably a large part 
of the necessary energy will in the future be 
covered by renewables 
Read more about district heating in Denmark at 
www.dbdh.dk. 
Index 2000 = 100
60
1995
‘00
‘05
‘10
‘15
‘20
‘25
‘30
80
100
120
140
160
GDP: Gross Domestic Product
Final energy consumption
The principle of combined heat and power plant
Fuel 
distribution
Distribution  
generation
Conversion
losses
Recovered heat:  
-Domestic hot water
-Space heating
-Space cooling
-Ventilation air
-Humidity control
Electricity
GDP and total final energy consumption (climate-adjusted). 
The data are historic and projections.
Source: Danish Energy Agency


--- page 28 ---
CONCLUSION
55
54
Smart cities for the future
Smart cities is a concept which involves the 
smart handling and integration of a number 
of systems and services such as the supply of 
electric power, district heating and cooling, 
water and sewage and handling of waste. Local 
public and individual transportation can also be 
included, and the overall ambition is to increase 
general energy efficiency. This is a vision for a 
future with a smarter and more integrated city 
infrastructure than the one we know today. 
Based on current knowledge it seems obvious 
that it is affordable and feasible to save much 
more energy and to improve the environment 
and in this way lead the way towards a smaller 
impact on our climate. 
Already today, DH systems exploit large 
amounts of waste heat in many cities around 
the world, cutting local fuel bills. District heat-
ing systems have been called the waste man-
agement systems for energy, as they are able to 
recover waste heat from power plants, cooling 
systems, industrial plants and waste incinera-
tors. In addition, renewable energy such as 
geothermal, solar and wind energy are sources 
which are used more and more where possible. 
Heat pumps may be a necessary link in order 
to raise the temperature of a source of heat to 
accommodate the demands of the DH system. 
However, the trend in DH plants is to reduce the 
temperature level in both flow and return pipes. 
Similarly, the temperatures used in the opera-
tion of contemporary cooling plants in buildings 
and DC systems are higher than before. In 
this way, the inevitable loss of energy from DE 
networks will be reduced. 
The use of lower temperatures for DH (or 
higher temperatures in DC) also improves the 
overall efficiency of the generation plants. It is a 
fact that CHP plants are able to generate more 
power on the same amount of fuel when the 
temperature of the cooling water (which is DH 
water in a CHP plant) is low. Also, the heat from 
renewable sources can be utilised with higher 
efficiency at lower temperatures, and the same 
is the case for industrial surplus heat or sources 
of waste heat.
Low temperature DH also increases the possibil-
ities to exploit even small and local sources of 
energy. This might be excess heat from a server 
room or from a transformer station anywhere 
in a city. Even excess heat from hot showers or 
kitchens might be future “hot spots” to exploit 
in future DH systems
CONCLUSION
It is a fact that the world’s demand for energy, 
particularly electric power used in industry, 
electric appliances, office machines, air-
conditioning, transportation etc., is constantly 
rising. Therefore it makes sense to enforce 
urban DE infrastructures  and combine the 
necessary services in smart and energy efficient 
systems. 
District energy is one of those services and has 
already demonstrated its value in several cities. 
The possibilities for further integration and 
improvements providing higher energy effi-
ciency are numerous, and new applications and 
smart solutions will appear in the future.


--- page 29 ---
GRUNDFOS Holding A/S
Poul Due Jensens Vej 7
DK-8850 Bjerringbro
Tel: +45 87 50 14 00
www.grundfos.com
The name Grundfos, the Grundfos logo, and be think innovate are registered trademarks  
owned by Grundfos Holding A/S or Grundfos A/S, Denmark. All rights reserved worldwide.
98504984/1113
VISIT US ONLINE 
For more information on Grundfos 
Commercial Building Services and 
our services, please visit 
www.thinkingbuildings.com
Here, you can read all about our 
products or use our online tools, 
including the timesaving Quick 
Pump Selection tool.
